Gazipur Agricultural University 
Course contents: 
 
Department of Anatomy and Histology (ANH) 
 
ANH 101:  Gross Anatomy I: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P)                                                           
Theory 
Introduction: Definition, importance, classification of anatomy, topographic and descriptive terms. Osteology: 
Classification, composition, physical properties and structure of bones. Description and classification of 
skeleton; bones of different organs/parts of domestic animals. Arthrology (Syndesmology): Classification and 
structure of joints. Articulation and ligaments of different areas of body in domestic animals. Myology: 
Structural and functional classification of muscles. Gross study of skeletal muscles of different regions of 
body with their origin, insertion and action. Angiology: Gross morphology of heart and disposition of arteries, 
veins and lymphatics of domestic animals. 
 
Practical  
Morphological study of the bones of axial and appendicular skeleton, joints and organs of circulation of 
domestic animals. Dissection of domestic animals to study skeletal muscles of head, neck, thorax, abdomen, 
pelvis, tail and limbs. 
 
ANH 102:  General Histology and Embryology: Course Credit: 3+1(T+P)                                                             
Theory 
General Histology: Introduction: Definition and importance of histology and its relationship with other 
subjects. Cytology: Cells and their organelles, structures, composition, physical properties, characteristics, 
and functions. Basic tissues: Classification, locations, characteristics and function of epithelia and their 
modification, connective tissue and their components including blood and bone, muscular tissue and their 
functions. Neuron, nerve fibre and ganglions; Embryology: Fundamental concepts and scopes of embryology. 
Gametogenesis, fertilization, cleavage, gastrulation, and the development of foetal membranes in domestic 
animals and birds. Structure and types of mammalian placenta. Development of the organs of digestive, 
respiratory, urogenital, cardiovascular and nervous system, organs of special sense and endocrine glands. Fetal 
circulation and changes after birth. Teratology, teratogenesis and twinning. 
 
Practical 
Microscopy, micrometry and microscope handling. Comparison of light and electron microscopy. General 
staining techniques and preparation of histological slides. Microscopic examination and identification of basic 
tissues and their components. Study of structure of mammalian ova and spermatozoa. Study of the whole 
mount and serial sections of mammalian/chick embryo/foetus at different stages of development Microscopic 
anatomy of fetal membranes and placenta. 
 
ANH 131:  Gross Anatomy II: Course Credit: 3 +1 (T+P)                                                             
Theory 
Splanchnology: Gross morphological and topographical study of various organs of digestive, respiratory, 
urogenital, lymphatic and endocrine systems, pleura and peritoneum in domestic animals. Aesthesiology: 
Gross morphological study of the eye, ear, nose, gustatory apparatus, hoof, horn and skin in domestic animals. 
Neurology: Definition, classification and structures/organs of the nervous system (brain, spinal cord, neuron, 
nerve, nerve trunk and nerve plexuses) of domestic animals. 
 
Practical 
Outline of body cavities and study of organs of digestive, respiratory, urogenital, lymphatics, endocrine and 
nervous systems of domestic animals through dissection. 
 
ANH 132:  Systemic Histology: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P)                                                             
Theory  
Digestive system: Different segments of the alimentary tract and accessory organs. Respiratory system: Nasal 
passages, larynx, trachea and the lungs. Circulatory system: Heart and blood vessels, lymphatic tissues and 
organs. Urinary system: Kidney, ureter, urinary bladder and urethra. Genital system: Male and female genital 
organs. Endocrine system: Pituitary, adrenal, thyroid, parathyroid, pancreas, gonads and others endocrine 
organs/tissues. Integumentary system: Skin and appendages. 
 
Practical 
Examination of histological sections of the organs/parts of various systems (digestive, respiratory, circulatory, 
urogenital, endocrine and integumentary) of domestic animals. 
 
ANH 261: Comparative Anatomy and Neuro-anatomy: Course Credit: 0+1(T+P)       
                                                       
Practical 
Comparative Anatomy: Comparative study of the bones and visceral organs (digestive, respiratory, 
urogenital, cardiovascular and nervous system) of horse, cattle, goat, sheep, dog, cat and birds. Neuro-
anatomy: Gross structures of central, peripheral and autonomic nervous system. Circulation, ventricles and 
cerebrospinal spinal fluid of the brain. Dissection and display of the nerves of head, neck, thorax, abdomen, 
pelvis, tail, and limbs in domestic animals. 
 
ANH 361: Topographic and Surgical Anatomy: Course Credit: 0+1(T+P)                                                             
Practical 
Topographic location of the organs of different systems of the body of domestic animals and birds in relation 
to surgery. Nerves block and their sites for various surgical interventions in domestic animals and birds. 
Surface anatomy of the head, neck, thorax, abdomen, pelvis, limbs, and perineal regions of domestic animals 
and their surgical interventions. 
 
Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics (ABG) 
 
ABG 201: Animal Genetics: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P)                                                             
 
Theory 
Concept, history, application and branches of genetics; Different theories of inheritance, Mendel and his 
contribution in genetics, Mendel’s laws and their modifications; Multiple alleles, coat color inheritance in 
rabbit, blood groups and blood protein polymorphism in animals; Linkage, its significance and types; Crossing 
over, its significance and types, cytological basis of crossing over; Sex determination, sex-linked inheritance, 
sex-influenced and sex-limited traits with their inheritance mechanisms in farm animals; Animal cell-its 
organelles and function, chromosomes and karyotypes of farm animals, gametogenesis and fertilization in 
farm animals ;Variation in chromosomal structure and number, significance of chromosomal aberration; 
Mutation, its classification and causes, phenotypic and genotypic effect of mutation; DNA and RNA, their 
structure, types and functions, plasmids and mitochondrial DNA;Replication of DNA in prokaryotes and 
eukaryotes, Transcription of RNA; Genetic code, protein and protein synthesis apparatus, translation and 
transduction; Recombinant DNA technology and its application, transgenic animals, genetically modified 
organisms, cloning. 
 
Practical 
Materials used for genetic study and their handling; Blood collection from jugular vein of ruminant for genetic 
study; Blood processing for genetic study; Study of multiple alleles blood grouping in human; Study on 
morphology of Drosophila; Preparation of culture media of drosophila; Study on chromosome; Study on cell 
division. 
 
ABG 361: Animal Breeding: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P) 
Theory 
Concept, history, application and branches of genetics.; Different theories of inheritance, Mendel and his 
contribution in genetics, Mendel’s laws and their modifications; Multiple alleles, coat color inheritance in 
rabbit, blood groups and blood protein polymorphism in animals; Linkage, its significance and types; Crossing 
over, its significance and types, cytological basis of crossing over; Sex determination, sex-linked inheritance, 
sex-influenced and sex-limited traits with their inheritance mechanisms in farm animals; Animal cell-its 
organelles and function, chromosomes and karyotypes of farm animals, gametogenesis and fertilization in 
farm animals; Variation in chromosomal structure and number, significance of chromosomal aberration; 
Mutation, its classification and causes, phenotypic and genotypic effect of mutation; DNA and RNA, their 
structure, types and functions, plasmids and mitochondrial DNA; Replication of DNA in prokaryotes and 
eukaryotes, Transcription of RNA; Genetic code, protein and protein synthesis apparatus, translation and 
transduction; Recombinant DNA technology and its application, transgenic animals, genetically modified 
organisms, cloning. 
 
  Practical 
Materials used for genetic study and their handling; Blood collection from jugular vein of ruminant for genetic 
study; Blood processing for genetic study; Study of multiple alleles blood grouping in human; Study on 
morphology of Drosophila; Preparation of culture media of drosophila; Study on chromosome; Study on cell 
division; 
 
Department of Animal Science and Nutrition (ASN) 
 
ASN 101: General Animal Science: Course Credit: 2+1 (T+P)                                                             
 
Theory 
Introduction: Definition and scope of animal science, zoological classification of common farm and 
domesticated animals. Domestication and geographical distribution of farm animals, contribution of livestock 
and poultry, present situation of livestock, Economic impacts of livestock on farming system of Bangladesh, 
Integrated farming system; Glossary of animal science: Common scientific terms used in livestock and poultry 
based on age, sex and purposes; different types of animal derived products; Breeds of livestock: Common 
breeds of different livestock and their important characteristics; Livestock Feeding: Definitions, Classification 
of feed stuff, Essential feed nutrients and their function in animal body. Feed scarcity and straw treatment, 
Feeding system of livestock. Classification of animal based on digestive system and feeding behavior, feed 
resources of livestock and poultry; Housing of livestock: Definition and objectives of housing, site selection 
for livestock farms. Type and systems of housing for livestock and poultry; Livestock products and by-
products: Definition, composition and food value of different livestock products and by-products. 
Classification of different types of animal by-products and their uses; Psychology and behavior of animal: 
Definition, types of behavior in domestic animals, causes of behavioral response in animals. Normal and 
abnormal behavior of animals. Common vices of domesticated animals and their remedies; Ecology and 
adaptation: Definition and branches of ecology, relationship of ecology with other disciplines. Adaptation of 
farm animals, stages and distribution of adaptation, factors responsible for the adaptation of farm animals. 
Effect of climate on animals, acclimatization of exotic animals in Bangladesh;  
 
Practical 
Animal behavior, psychology, approaching and handling of animal; Identification of different body points of 
animal; Casting and restraining of animal; Shearing and clipping of animal; Grooming, washing, bedding and 
clothing of animal; Dehorning and disbudding of animal; Visit of different livestock and poultry species and 
breeds, and farms; Castration of animal; Live weight determination and marking of animal; Dentition and 
aging of animal. 
 
ASN 161: Draught and Meat Animal Production and Management: Course Credit: 2+1 (T+P)                             
 
Theory 
Introduction: Definition, draught animals, choice of species, popular draught animals. History, domestication 
and geographical distribution of different draught animals, Importance and problems of draught and meat 
animal production in Bangladesh; Draught animal management: Contribution/Importance of draft animal, 
production system, problems of draft animal production in Bangladesh. Different breeds of draught animals 
and their characteristics. Selection and judging of draught animals. Housing and feeding of draught animals. 
Adaptation and effect of environment on draught animal production. Planning and evaluation of small scale 
and commercial draft animal farm, Common diseases of draft animal and their preventive measure; Buffalo 
management: National and international perspective of buffalo. Contribution/Importance of buffalo, 
production system, problems of buffalo production in Bangladesh. Different breeds of buffalo and their 
characteristics. Selection and judging of buffalo. Housing and feeding of buffalo. Adaptation and effect of 
environment on buffalo production. Planning and evaluation of small scale and commercial buffalo farm, 
Common diseases of buffaloes and their preventive measure; Beef cattle production and management: 
Terminology related to beef cattle, Beef cattle production systems. Prospects and problems of beef cattle 
enterprise. Judging and selection of beef cattle, Housing and feeding of beef cattle. Beef fattening program. 
Planning of small scale and commercial beef farm. Common diseases of beef cattle and their preventive 
measures; Sheep and goat management: Sheep and goat breeds and their characteristics. Housing of sheep and 
goat. Management of sheep and goat for reproduction. Common diseases of sheep and goat and their 
preventive measure. 
 
Practical 
Different management practices of buffaloes and draught animals; Care and management of draught animals; 
Judging and selection of draught and beef cattle; Judging and selection of buffaloes; Record keeping of 
buffaloes and draught animals; Training of draught animals; Ration formulation for sheep and goat; Planning 
of small scale goat and sheep farming in semi-intensive system; Survey of small scale beef fattening program 
and sheep and goat production system. 
 
 
ASN 201: Fodder Production: Course Credit: 2+1 (T+P)                                                             
 
Theory 
Introduction: Definition of feeds, fodder and allied terms, classification and importance of fodder and forage; 
Fodder production guidelines: Suitability of different fodder crops in different parts of Bangladesh, 
production technology of different fodder crops; Composition of plant and animal body: General 
composition of plant and animal body, comparison between plants and animals, factors that affect the chemical 
composition of the forage; Pasture and pasture management: Definition of pasture, importance and 
classification of pasture, characteristics of a good pasture, management of pasture land and feasibility of 
pasturing in Bangladesh; Poisonous plants: Predisposing factors and characteristic symptoms of plant 
poisoning, some common poisonous plants, the prevention procedure and management of plant poisoned 
animal; Management of land for better fodder production: Definition and classify of soil and soil 
component, relationship between soil PH and nutrient availability, problem of soil and its correction; 
Conservation of fodder crops: Importance of fodder crops conservation, methods of conservation, silage and 
hay: preparation, advantages, methods, crops suitable for silage and hay making, stage of harvesting, factors 
affecting the nutritive value, nutrients losses during silage and hay making, types of silo pits, characteristics 
of a good silo, use of additives during ensiling and changes occurs during silage and hay making, haylage. 
 
Practical 
Explore agricultural elements and its importance for fodder production; Select appropriate fodder for livestock 
Select appropriate feeds for livestock; Estimation of manure and fertilizers for fodder production; Planning of 
fodder production; Cultivation procedure of legumes fodders; Cultivation procedure of non-legumes fodders 
Preparation of hay; Preparation of silage; Observation of different fodder production activities. 
 
ASN 231: Wildlife, Zoo, Aquatic and Companion Animal Management: Course Credit: 2+1 (T+P)                                       
 
Theory 
Introduction to wildlife: Concepts and terminologies related to wildlife, importance of wildlife. Status of 
wildlife in the world and Bangladesh. Zoogeographical regions and wildlife distribution in Bangladesh; habitat 
requirements of wild animals; causes of extinction of wild animals. Wildlife ecology and environment; 
Wildlife management: Zoological classification of common wild animals; salient features of selected wild 
animals; feeds and feeding, restraint, housing and other management of wild animals. Transportation of wild 
animals. Management of wild animals and birds in the zoo, safari park and national park under natural 
habitation; Management of laboratory animals: Definition of lab. Animals; general concepts about laboratory 
animals; classification of lab. animals; salient features of common lab animals; different housing, their 
requirements and specifications for lab. animals; feeding and management practices of selected lab. Animals; 
Zoo and zoo animal management: History of zoo; purposes of zoo establishment; role of zoo and zoo education 
for conservation of wildlife; classification of zoo animals. Management of zoo; different housing, their 
requirements and specifications for zoo animals; feeds and feeding of zoo animals; restraint and management 
of zoo animals; staff position of a zoo; precautions at zoo; Conservation of wildlife and biodiversity: Wildlife 
conservation and biodiversity. Wildlife conservation program in developing countries, threatened species of 
animals and birds in Bangladesh. Zoo education for the conservation of wildlife. Strategies to conserve wild 
animals and biodiversity. Wildlife conservation laws and treaties. Wildlife conservation societies and 
organizations; Planning and development of wildlife habitats: Establishment of national parks, 
implementation of conservation law. Regulation of wildlife services, research and education, zoo and 
conservation biology. Principles and management for conservation of endangered species. Planning and 
development for establishment of zoo and safari park; Breeding and reproduction of wildlife: General concepts 
related to breeding and reproduction of wildlife. Physiological and environmental factors related to breeding 
and reproduction of wildlife, zoo, aquatic and companion animal. Breeding and reproductive behavior of wild 
animals and birds in the forest, especially in the Sundarbans mangrove forest; Preventive measures for 
common diseases: Common diseases of wildlife, zoo, aquatic and companion animal. Preventive measures 
and health care of wildlife, zoo, aquatic and companion animals; Management of aquatic animals: Definition 
of aquatic animals; classification of aquatic animals; categories of aquatic animals available at zoo; salient 
features of common aquatic animals; different housing, their requirements and specifications for aquatic 
animals; feeding and management practices of aquatic animals. Climate change and aquatic animals; 
Companion animal management: Companion animal and their types. Companion animal management and 
handling program around the world. Companion animal training. Implementation of the companion animal 
management law, regulation, wildlife services, research and education. Impact of companion animal on human 
health and psychology. Environmental effects of companion animals. 
 
Practical 
Identification of different species of herbivore zoo animals; Identification of different species of carnivore zoo 
animals; Identification of different species of reptiles; Identification of different species of birds; Identification 
of different species of small mammals; Psychology and behavior of common wildlife, zoo, aquatic and 
companion animals; Restraining and handling of wildlife, zoo, aquatic and companion animals; Planning and 
management of zoo, safari park, laboratory units and natural habitats; Visiting different zoo for demonstration 
of management, feeding, breeding and disease prevention; Visiting different safari park, national park and 
forest to demonstrate habitats of wildlife. 
Field Trip:  
Vising the Zoo and Safari park for acquiring practical knowledge.  
 
ASN 261: Non-Ruminant Nutrition, Feeds and Feeding: Course Credit: 2+1 (T+P)                                                  
 
Theory 
Introduction to non-ruminant animals and their feeding behavior, terminology related to non-ruminants’ animals; 
Digestion, absorption and metabolism of micro and macro nutrients; Terms related to energy expression and 
measurements, applicability of different energy system, calculation of energy requirements of avian and other non-
ruminants’ animal; Amino acid and their essentiality, measurement of availability, methods for evaluating 
protein quality in a feedstuff, estimation of protein requirements in non- ruminants’ animal; Essential fatty acid, 
Oxidation, cholesterol or fat as an energy source, synthesis of fatty acid and glycerol; Characteristics, physiological 
function, deficiency symptoms, sources of vitamin and mineral, composition of vitamin mineral mixture; Interaction 
among the nutrients, nutrition and feeding, nutrient requirements, diet formulation and feeding methods of 
non-ruminants’ animal. 
 
Practical 
Introduction to the feed of non-ruminants; Ration formulation and preparation for different non ruminant 
animals; Preparation of vitamin mineral mixture; Introduction of laboratory instruments for analysis of 
feedstuff; Calculation of TDN; Laboratory animal diets; Digestibility trial on domestic rabbits; Management 
of rabbit and guinea pig; Management of domestic horse; Survey of feed markets 
 
 
 
 
ASN 331: Meat Science, Wool Technology and Byproduct management: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P)                                       
 
Theory 
Introduction and terminology:  Description of the prospect, potentials and problems of meat industry in 
Bangladesh. Terminologies related to meat science, wool technology and waste management; Nutritive value 
of meat: Define and explain meat, different types of meat and meat cuts. Nutritive value of meat. Chemical 
composition of meat from different species. Exploring the factors that are actually associated with nutritive 
value of meat; Quality of meat and meat products: Describing the categories of processed meat and meat 
products; factors affecting quantity and quality of meat. Differentiate the different quality and safety aspects 
of meat and meat products, such as pH, rigor mortis and water holding capacity. Eating quality of meat and 
meat products; The growth and body composition of animal tissue: Explanation of the animal growth 
phenomena. Classification of the growth curve of different animal species. Description of the animal growth 
process. Different types of muscles and their function; Slaughtering and processing of meat animal: Definition 
and types of slaughtering. Stunning of livestock and poultry. Pre-and post-slaughter care and management of 
animals. Explanation about slaughtering and processing method of meat animal; Slaughterhouse byproducts: 
Importance of slaughterhouse byproducts. Illustrating the principles and methods of slaughterhouse 
byproducts management. Multidimensional use of slaughterhouse byproducts. Importance of hides and skins, 
processing of hides and skins to prepare leather and leather goods; Meat preservation and spoilage: Importance 
of meat preservation, principles of meat preservation. Illustration of the methods of meat preservation. 
Definition of meat spoilage, spoilage phenomena, biochemical and physiological changes of meat and meat 
products during storage, such as meat pH, meat microbiology, enzyme and other substances. Quality and 
safety aspects of meat and meat products during storage; Wool Technology: Definition and explanation of 
glossary of wool, different types of wool. Classification of wool and properties of wool. Factors affecting 
quality of wool. Animal health and wool quality. Wool Technology: Assessment of the wool quality. 
Collection and processing of wool to produce yarn, and yarn to fabric or finishing products; Animal waste 
management: Definition of animal waste and its composition. Importance of animal waste and its 
management. Impact of animal waste management on animal and human health. Definition and benefits of 
biogas and compost. Science of composting and factors affecting the composting process. Biochemical and 
microbial phenomena during biogas production. Animal waste management: Biogas plant management. 
Establishment of biogas plant. Types of biogas plant and their management. Explanation of the process of bio 
digestion and factors affecting biogas production. Description of the different methods for compost making 
with their advantages and disadvantages. Use of biogas slurry. 
 
Practical  
Study on pre-slaughter care of animals; Study on methods of stunning of animals; Study on methods of 
slaughtering of animals; Study on identification of meat of different species; Study on demonstration of 
different meat cuts and their qualitative characteristics; Study on calculation of dressing percentage, carcass 
weight and meat yield; Study on characteristics of wool; Study on animal waste management; Visit of meat 
market, slaughterhouse and meat processing plant; Visit of different waste management practices, biogas 
plant, and wool processing. 
 
ASN 361: Ruminant Nutrition, Feeds and Feeding: Course Credit: 2+1(T+P)                                                           
 
Theory 
Terminology of nutrition, history and gradual expansion of the field of nutrition, classification of nutrients, 
functions, deficiencies and sources; Physiology and microbiology of rumen ; Fetal development establishment 
of rumen microbes, microbial population rumen environment, establishment of rumen microbe’s types and 
nutrient requirements by rumen microbes; Digestive systems of different ruminants; Organs of digestion 
classification of digestion digestive physiology of ruminants, microbial digestion of fibre, bulk importance of 
bulk digestion absorption and metabolism of CHOs proteins fats minerals and vitamins; Evaluation of feeds; 
Importance and methods of feed evaluation chemical/proximate analysis digestibility trials evaluation of 
protein quality in ruminant; Feeding standard 
Definition feeding standard development of feeding standard prospects of developing feeding agenda in 
Bangladesh; alanced ration and feeding of livestock; Formulation of ration for different types of ruminants 
feeding of livestock during scarcity periods; Anti- nutritional factors in animal feedstuffs; Substances 
depressing digestion or metabolism of proteins reducing the solubility or interfering with the utilization of 
minerals inactivating the certain vitamins cyanogens moulds and mycotoxins in animals’ feeds ;Feed 
technology, storage and quality control of feedstuffs; Processing of grains, compound livestock feed 
manufactures and feed industry in Bangladesh. 
 
Practical 
Identification of animal feedstuffs; Study on the safety rules in the laboratory; and sampling principles and 
procedures; Preparation of solutions for chemical analysis; Determination of dry matter (DM) and total ash; 
Determination of crude protein (CP); Determination of crude fibre (CF); Determination of crude fat/ ether 
extract (EE); Ration formulation for ruminants. Digestibility / metabolic trials with animals. Visit to livestock 
farms and feed mill. 
 
Department of Dairy and Poultry Science (DPS) 
 
DPS 131: General Poultry Science: Course Credit: 2+1(T+P) 
 
Theory 
Scope and impotence of Poultry and Poultry industry in BD; Origin, domestication of poultry spices; 
Terminology and classification of Poultry; Breed and its characteristics; Housing, feeds and feeding: 
nutritional quality, ration; Eggs: types and composition, Incubator and Incubation of poultry; Brooding and 
rearing. 
 
Practical 
Handling of poultry, Identification of poultry breeds; External body parts and internal organs; Identification 
of feed ingredients and farm equipment’s; Identification of feathers; Visit to commercial poultry farm. 
 
DPS 161: General Dairy Science: Course Credit: 2+1(T+P) 
 
Theory 
Introduction to dairy science, Evolution of dairy industry, Milk marketing channel in Bangladesh, Dairy 
animal’s behavior and comfort, Site selection for dairy farm and fodder land, Classification of dairy feedstuffs, 
Food value and importance of milk, colostrum and Milk products. 
 
Practical 
Introduction to BSMRAU dairy Farm, Identification of common feedstuffs for dairy cattle, Cow comfort 
index, rumination, Observation of Dairy animals’ behavior: locomotion score, gait and posture, Identification 
of Manure score, Identification of Rumen fill score, Identification of Body Condition score, Acquaintance 
with milk and milk products. 
 
DPS 201: Poultry production and management: Course Credit: 3+1(T+P) 
 
Theory  
Problems and prospect of duck, geese, pigeon, Guinea fowl, turkey and quail rearing in Bangladesh; Profitable 
poultry production; Site selection and construction of poultry farm; Feeding methods and standard; Forms of 
feed; Nutrient requirements and formulation of ration for chicken, duck and quail; Layer and broiler strains;  
Layer and broiler management; Formation, structure and nutritive value of an egg; Persistency of egg 
production; Factors affecting egg production; Storing, grading, packaging, and preservation of egg; Integration 
of duck and fish production. 
 
 
 
 
Practical 
Identification of different breeds, varieties and strains of chicken, ducks, pigeons and quail; Selection and 
culling of breeding stocks; Design of a poultry farm; Preparation of brooder house; Debeaking of chicken; 
Formulation of ration for poultry species; Meat yield of chicken and duck, Farm planning of chicken and duck.  
Field Trip: Visiting the poultry farm for acquiring knowledge.  
 
DPS 261: Dairy Animal Production and Management: Course Credit: 2+1(T+P) 
 
Theory 
Advanced studies on breeds, Dairy Farm Operation, Dairy Housing, Dairy Farm Management, Milk synthesis 
and Milking, Farm Planning. 
 
Practical 
Acquaintance with different breeds of dairy animals, Dairy farm plan and layout for successful dairy operation, 
Housing of dairy animals, Routine work practices in dairy farm, Judging and selection of dairy animals, 
Condition scoring, Record keeping practices in dairy farm, Different methods of milking, Tests for detecting 
abnormal milk and mastitis. 
 
DPS 331: Dairy and Poultry Product Technology: Course Credit: 2+1(T+P) 
Dairy Products Technology 
Theory 
Market Milk, Milk Processing, Milk Products, Quality and safety tests of milk and milk products. 
 
Practical 
Routine Platform Test of Milk, Determination of Acidity and Fat in Milk, Determination of Total Solids (TS) 
and Ash in Milk, Parts of cream separator; Separation of cream by modern centrifugal cream separator, 
Manufacture of Dahi/Yoghurt, Manufacture of butter, butter milk and ghee. 
 
Poultry Product Technology 
Theory 
Importance of poultry products technology; Egg technology: Physicochemical changes of preserved eggs, 
Usage of egg as food and nonfood; Preparation of different egg recipes; Meat technology: Pre-slaughter 
factors affect poultry meat quality; processing and cut-up parts of broiler; Preservation and storage techniques 
for poultry meat and meat products; Manufacturing of meat products; Nutritional value of meat, meat safety 
and Hazard analysis and critical control Point (HACCAP).  
 
Practical 
Preparation of mayonnaise, pudding, nuggets, meat ball, chicken soup, kebab and sausages; Demonstration of 
broiler processing and cut up parts; Visit to broiler processing plant. 
 
DPS 401: Breeder Farm Management and Hatchery Operation: Course Credit:  2+1(T+P) 
 
Theory 
Why breeder farm? Types of breeder farms, Statistics of breeder farms in Bangladesh; Concepts of pure line; 
commercial breeding programs to produce hybrids, selection and culling of parent stock, Parent stock 
management; Bio-security measurements;  Litter management; Prevention and control of common diseases; 
Vaccination for parent stock; Disposal of dead birds, manure and  litter materials; Hatching egg production; 
Hatchery operation: Economics of hatchery; Site selection for hatchery; design and construction of hatchery; 
sanitation measurements; Incubator and  incubation of egg; selection of hatching eggs; Sexing, delivery and 
transportation of day-old chicks 
 
 
 
Practical 
Selection and culling of breeding stock; Merit of good and poor layer; Selection of hatching eggs; Design and 
construction of hatchery; Sanitation of incubator and hatchery building; Fumigation of hatchery; Hatching of 
eggs using natural and artificial incubator; Candling of eggs; Sexing and delivery of day-old chicks; Visit to 
commercial hatchery. 
 
 
 
Dept. of Gynecology, Obstetrics and Reproductive Health (GOR) 
 
 
GOR 401:  Gynecology and Reproductive Biotechnology: Course Credit: 3+1 
Theory 
Introduction and definition of common terms; Anatomy and Physiology of Female reproduction; Hormones 
in Female Reproduction; Puberty and estrous cycle; Breeding soundness examination of female animals; 
Etiology, diagnosis, treatment, management and economic importance of infertility, subfertility and sterility; 
Factors affecting reproduction – seasonality, nutrition, stress, environment, management, suckling and 
diseases; Genetic and acquired anomalies of reproductive tract and fetal development; Diagnosis, treatment 
and prevention of Mastitis. Lactation and artificial induction of lactation. Reproductive Biotechnology: 
Embryo transfer technology: selection of donors and recipients; Synchronization, super-ovulation, surgical 
and non-surgical collection of embryos and evaluation of embryos; Cryopreservation of embryos, transfer of 
embryos to donors; In vitro fertilization, in vitro maturation, micromanipulation of embryos; Sexing of sperm 
and embryos; Transgenic animals. Chimeras; Stem cell biotechnology 
 
Practical 
Clinical examination of female genitalia in slaughter house specimens; Comparative anatomy of female 
reproductive tracts; Evaluation of female animals for breeding soundness; Per-rectal palpation of female 
genital organs; Estrus detection in cattle and buffaloes; Fern pattern of cervical mucus and exfoliated vaginal 
cytology; Techniques of intrauterine therapy; External and per-rectal pregnancy diagnosis in cattle and 
buffaloes; Demonstration of reproductive pathological conditions using museum/slaughter house specimens; 
Use of ultrasound / RIA / ELISA in gynecology; Synchronization of estrus and ovulation in farm animals; 
Synchronization of estrus in donors and recipients, super ovulation, surgical and nonsurgical collection and 
transfer of embryos; Collection of oocytes from slaughter house genitalia. In vitro maturation, in vitro 
fertilization and cryopreservation of embryos; Sexing of embryos. 
 
GOR 431: Andrology and Artificial Insemination: Course Credit: 2+1 (T+P)           
                                                  
Theory 
Scope of Andrology and Artificial Insemination (AI) in Veterinary Medicine; Functional anatomy and 
physiology of male reproduction; Spermatogenesis, semen formation and related abnormalities; Clinical 
examination of males for breeding soundness evaluation; Semen collection, evaluation, processing, 
preservation and clinical practice of AI; Clinical management of fertility of male animals; Infertility and 
uterine infections due to faulty AI; Veterinary management of semen borne and AI-related diseases; Recording 
and clinical analysis of reproductive and AI parameters; Diseases of male reproduction; Health management 
of AI stud males; Computer application and hormone assays for the veterinary control of AI field services. 
 
Practical 
Clinical examination of stud males; Collection, evaluation, processing and freezing of semen; Practice of 
artificial insemination; Clinical practice of the evaluation of bull station and semen laboratory to certify semen 
to be used at AI; Path morphological examination of fresh and preserved semen; Collection of seminal fluid 
for microbiological examination; Preparation of teaser bulls; Operative techniques for the corrections of 
injuries and affections of male reproductive system.  
 
Field trip  
Visiting the bull station, Bangladesh cattle development and dairy farm, saver, Dhaka for practical knowledge. 
 
 
 
GOR 461: Reproductive Immunology and Obstetrics: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P)                                                     
Theory 
General principle of immune responses, Mucosal immunity of the reproductive tract, Immunopathology of 
reproduction, Altered susceptibility to infection in pregnancy, Protection of the fetus against rejection, Passive 
transfer of immunity from mother to offspring, Effect of gonadal hormones on immune function, 
Immunoregulation of fertility, Immunology of infertility, Defense/tolerance against spermatozoa, Placenta as 
an immune organ, Immunity in pregnancy, Immunopathology of placenta, Protection of fetus and neonate 
against infection, Immune related disorders in pregnancy; Sensitization to seminal fluid and spermatozoa, 
Immonologic factors related to male fertilization failure. Autoimmune orchitis, Immunologimcal castration. 
Vaccination to maximize fertility.  
 
Practical 
Pelvimetry of different species of farm animals; Demonstration of different types of placenta; Use of 
obstetrical instruments; Epidural and other obstetrical anaesthesia; Manupulation of fetal malpresentation in 
phantom boxes; Handling of prolapse of genitalia- application of vulvar sutures; Fetotomy, ccaesarean section, 
post-operative care and management of obstetrical cases; Demonstration of ovariohysterectomy and cesarean 
operation; 
Laparoscopy 
and 
ultrasonography 
of 
female 
reproductive 
organs; 
Immunoassayes 
(Radioimmunoassays, Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay, Enzyme immunoassays) in reproductive 
endocrinology.  
 
 
GOR 462: Theriogenology of Wildlife, Zoo, Aquatic and Companion Animals: Course Credit: 2 +1 (T+P)                        
 
Theory 
Female reproduction and endocrinology of wildlife, birds and companion animals; Puberty and estrous cycle 
of wildlife, birds and companion animals; Physiology of mother and fetus during pregnancy. Management of 
pregnant animals. Methods of pregnancy diagnosis; Abortion. Teratology. Congenital and acquired 
abnormalities causing reproductive inefficiencies; Initiation and mechanism of parturition, induced 
parturition, care and management of newborn and dam; Manipulative delivery in companion animals; Injuries 
and diseases incidental to pregnancy and parturition. Retention of placenta. Utero-vaginal prolapse, Post-
partum reproduction and uterine infections; Female reproductive health management of wild zoo and 
companion animals; Vaccination to maximize fertility in companion animals; Conservation of wildlife, zoo, 
birds and companion animals using reproductive biotechnology. 
 
Practical 
Diagnosis and treatment of genital diseases of male and female animals at the clinics; Treatment of gynaeco-
obstetrical and infertility related cases at the clinics and field conditions; Practice of reproductive health 
management, mastitis diagnosis, treatment and udder health management of different wild and companion 
animals; Operative techniques of female reproductive system of different wild and companion animals; 
Clinical and laboratory practice on pregnancy diagnosis of different wild and companion animals; 
Demonstration on fetotomy and cesarean operation of different wild and companion animals; Laparoscopy 
and ultrasonography of female reproductive organs of different wild and companion animals; Reproductive 
biotechnology tools and conservation of  different wild and companion animals. 
 
Field trip 
Visiting the Zoo and safari Park for practical knowledge. 
 
 
GOR 501: Theriogenology (Clinics): Course Credit: 0+2 (T+P)                                                             
Practical 
Diagnosis and treatment of genital diseases of male and female animals at the clinics; Treatment of gynaeco-
obstetrical and infertility related cases at the clinics and field conditions; On farm practice of reproductive 
health management, mastitis diagnosis, treatment and udder health management; Operative techniques of 
female reproductive system; Clinical and laboratory practice on pregnancy diagnosis; Demonstration on 
fetotomy and cesarean operation; Laparoscopy and ultrasonography of female reproductive organs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Medicine (MED) 
 
MED 361: General Medicine: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P)     
                                                         
Theory 
Definition, aim, objective, scope and history of clinical veterinary medicine and its relationship with other 
field and laboratory disciplines. Concepts of health and disease. Causes of disease (direct and indirect, 
biological and non-biological causes). Definition of common clinical terms. Diagnostic terms – definition and 
scope; Introduction to different techniques/methods (general and special) of clinical examination of animals, 
history taking, examination of the environment and examination of the animal. General examination – distant 
and close examination, physical examination of body regions and systems, Animal restraint – objective and 
methods of restraint. Clinical signs – Definition, classification, methods of detection and identification of 
clinical signs of diseases of different organ-systems of animals. Interpretation of significant clinical findings 
for diagnosis. Physical examination findings of clinical specimens; B. Diagnosis and treatment: Definition 
and types of diagnosis, principles of diagnosis, principles and basis of different types of diagnosis. Methods 
and steps of diagnosis. Indications and limitations of field and laboratory diagnosis; General principles of 
treatment, definition and scope of different types of treatment, factors of consideration in the treatment of food 
and non-food animals. Principles of selection of drugs and determination of dose, route, frequency and 
duration of treatment. Alternative medicine used in clinical and population veterinary practices; General 
systemic states – Disturbances of appetite, food intake and nutritional status-ill thrift, pica; stress, septicemia, 
hypothermia, hyperthermia, fever, toxemia, shock. Dehydration, electrolyte and acid-base imbalance. 
 
Practical 
Maintenance of records of everything done in the practical sessions in a practical note book to be checked and 
signed by teacher(s) concern; Introduction: Scope of veterinary hospital and clinical practice, requirements 
and responsibility of veterinary clinician; Methods of animal restraint: General and regional; Demonstration 
of clinical instruments: Diagnostic (including animal restraint) and therapeutic instruments; Demonstration of 
general (including modified forms) and special physical examination techniques used in different organ-
systems of domestic animals (healthy); Handling of clinical cases: General principles and procedures of 
clinical/physical examination in domestic animals. Demonstration of condition of distant inspection and 
physical examination; General principles and procedure of clinical history taking and distant inspection. 
Demonstration of demeanor and physical condition of animals; Clinical investigation of disease in individual 
sick animals: Clinical history taking, demonstration of methods and procedures of detection, identification 
and interpretation of clinical findings in making presumptive diagnosis, prognosis and clinical advice. 
Procedure of filling up of clinical investigation record forms; Clinical specimens: Demonstration of the 
methods of collection, physical examination, preservation and dispatch of specimens (feces, urine, blood, 
rumen fluid, abomasal fluid, milk, skin scrapings, plasma, serum, swabs, smears etc) to the laboratory; 
Demonstration of the methods of administration of drugs: External and internal; Transfusion techniques: 
Clinical practice on fluid and electrolyte, and blood transfusion in farm animals; Demonstration of drugs, 
dispensing and prescription writing: Principles and procedures. 
 
MED 401: Farm Animal Medicine: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P)                                                             
 
Theory 
Determinants of non-infectious diseases and other performance problems in cattle, buffaloes and horses. 
Etiology, pathogenesis, clinical findings, clinical pathology, diagnosis, prognosis, treatment and control of 
specific non-infectious diseases such as production and nutritional deficiency diseases, diseases associated 
with chemical and physical agents, poisons, allergy, inheritance of undesirable characters and unknown 
etiology in cattle; Determinants of infectious diseases in cattle, buffaloes and horses. Etiology, epidemiology, 
pathogenesis, clinical findings, diagnosis, prognosis, treatment and control of specific infectious diseases 
associated with biological agents such as bacteria, virus, Mycoplasma, Chlamydia, Rickettsia, algae, fungi, 
protozoa, helminthes and arthropod parasites in cattle, buffaloes and horses; Determinants of specific diseases 
of goats and sheep. Etiology, epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical findings, diagnosis, prognosis, treatment 
and control of specific infectious diseases associated with biological agents such as bacteria, virus, 
Mycoplasma, Chlamydia, Rickettsia, algae, fungi, protozoa, helminthes and arthropod parasites; Specific non-
infectious diseases including production and nutritional deficiency diseases, diseases associated with chemical 
and physical agents, poisons, allergy, inheritance of undesirable characters and unknown etiology in goats and 
sheep. 
 
Practical 
Clinical investigation of various diseases and performance problems and their management; Handling of 
clinical cases: Clinical/physical examination, non-laboratory presumptive diagnosis, prognosis and 
conservative treatment of special diseases and clinical advice for restoration of health in individual sick farm 
animals (domestic ruminants, swines and horses); Collection, physical examination, preservation and dispatch 
of clinical specimens to respective laboratories of the FVMAS, BSMRAU; Recording of at least 30 clinical 
cases with post-treatment evaluation and interpretation in a note book (approved format by the Department 
concern) to be checked and signed by teacher(s) concern; Farm visit. 
 
MED 431: Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P)                                                          
 
Theory 
A. Principles and Methods of Epidemiology and Ecology: Definition, objectives, uses, history and basic 
concepts of epidemiology. Definition of common; epidemiologic and population medicine terms. Causation 
of disease in population– multi-factorial theory of disease, Evan’s postulates, necessary and sufficient causes; 
Determinants of diseases – demographic, animal production and manage mental, environmental and pathogen 
factors. Temporal patterns of disease occurrence and trends. Veterinary ecology – principles and methods, 
mode of transmission of infection and disease process in population, infection dynamics; Measurements of 
health and disease in population – morbidity, mortality rate, case fatality rate, attack rate, prevalence, incidence 
rate, measurement of productivity. Descriptive epidemiology – survey, surveillance and monitoring of health 
and disease. Explanatory epidemiology and ecology – principles and methods of observational and 
experimental studies, analysis and demonstration of association and identification of risk factors. 
Epidemiologic investigation of sporadic, endemic, epidemic and pandemic diseases. Principles of risk 
analysis, assessment and management. Livestock development programs – planning, execution and 
evaluation; B. Preventive Veterinary Medicine: Introduction- Definition, aim, objectives of preventive 
veterinary medicine. Principles and methods of disease prevention and control. Planning, execution and 
evaluation of disease management programs in population: management of risk factors, biosecurity, hygienic 
measures, vaccination, prophylaxis, early diagnosis and treatment, disease control. Disease emergencies – 
nature and potential consequence, emergency preparedness, reporting and information systems. Management 
of important diseases of the animals – prevention, control, eradication and elimination with particular 
reference to List A, List B (TAD) and List C diseases; List A diseases: Mastitis, salmonellosis, colibacillosis, 
clostridial diseases, parasitic, metabolic and nutritional diseases; List B diseases (Transboundary Animal 
Diseases, TAD): Foot and mouth disease, PPR, rinderpest, sheep and goat pox, contagious bovine 
pleuropneumonia, hog cholera, swine fever, swine vesicular disease, vesicular stomatitis, lumpy skin disease, 
blue tongue, rift valley fever, african horse sickness; List C diseases: Anthrax, dermatophilosis, hemorrhagic 
septicemia, babesiosis, theileriosis, rabies, Johne’s disease, tuberculosis, brucellosis, leptospirosis, 
campylobacteriosis, infectious bovine rhinotracheitis, anaplasmosis, screw-worm diseases  heartwater, 
enzootic bovine leukosis, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (Summary of List B diseases in cattle of 
international trade significance); Animal health maintenance – general principles, significance of optimum 
animal health in optimum production in national and international livestock trade perspectives. General 
production medicine - general principles, mathematical techniques used in production medicine, record 
systems and herd monitoring, culling and improvement. Special production medicine - herd health 
management programs, environmental, disease and dietary management of food animals: dairy cattle, calves 
and replacement heifers, meat cattle, goat, sheep and swine herds. 
 
 
Practical 
Epidemiology: Epidemiologic explanatory variables: Identification and procedure of measurement in 
population. Development of questionnaires for various epidemiologic studies, surveys, surveillance and 
monitoring, Pre-testing of questionnaires in population, methods of collection of data. Statistical analysis of 
data: Demonstration of association and identification of risk factors. Epidemiologic response variables and 
properties of diagnostic tests: Procedure of computation. Epidemiologic data management and presenting 
numerical data, Measurement of population impact and transmission of disease: Procedure of computation. 
Diagnostic testing for identification of disease process and subclinical disease; Collection and analysis of 
ecologic data: Demonstration of ecological risk factors of disease in environment of the population of animals 
and birds. Preventive Medicine: Development of questionnaires, collection of disease and health data from 
population. Statistical analysis for identification of risk factors. Epidemiologic methods of health and disease 
management: Demonstration of risk factors in population and management. Demonstration of biosecurity, 
disease security, hygienic and sanitary measures. Disease management programs in population: Vaccination 
and disease control programs planning, execution and evaluation. Early diagnosis and treatment of disease in 
population; Herd health programs: Planning, execution, evaluation and extension of strategies.  
 
MED 432: Avian Medicine: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P)       
                                                       
Theory 
A. Clinical Poultry Medicine: Importance of health and disease management in poultry production; Principles 
of presumptive diagnosis of disease in poultry population – holistic and clinical field data; Source of infection; 
Clinical signs of poultry diseases – definition, classification, meanings and interpretation for presumptive 
diagnosis of diseases. Important general and special poultry diseases (listed below) – definition, causes, patho-
physiology, pathogenesis, clinical characteristics (signalment, anamnesis, nature of onset, clinical signs, 
course and severity, physical findings of specimens), mass diagnosis, mass treatment and prognosis: B. (a) 
Preventive Poultry Medicine: Objectives and significance of preventive poultry medicine in subsistence and 
commercial poultry production of Bangladesh; concepts of biosecurity, disease security and flock immunity;  
Holistic characteristics (frequency, distribution, ecology, temporal patterns and trends, risk factors, economic 
impact) and management (prevention, control and eradication of important general and special diseases (listed 
below) in subsistence and commercial poultry populations of Bangladesh; handling of disease outbreaks; 
disinfection and vaccination in disease control; (b) Production Poultry Medicine: General poultry production 
medicine – General principles of flock health, mathematical techniques used in flock health management, 
record systems and flock monitoring, culling and improvement. Special poultry production medicine – 
planning and evaluation of poultry flock health management programs (environmental, disease and dietary 
management) for commercial layer, broiler, cockerel and quails, subsistence chickens and ducks; hatchery 
and hatching eggs management; Poultry Diseases: General Diseases: Crop impaction, enteritis, stunted chick 
disease, bumble foot, round heart disease, endocarditis, nephrosis and gout, egg bound, abnormal eggs, egg 
peritonitis, false layer, internal layer; Infectious diseases: Avian streptococcosis, avian staphylococcosis, avian 
salmonellosis, avian cholera, anatipestifer infection, Infectious coryza, avian colibacillosis, avian clostridiosis 
(botulism, ulcerative enteritis, necrotic enteritis, gangrenous dermatitis), tuberculosis, avian mycoplasmosis, 
avian chlamydiosis, avian pox, Newcastle disease, infections bronchitis, infectious laryngotracheitis, Marek’s 
disease, lymphoid leukosis, egg drop syndrome, infectious bursal disease, chicken infectious anemia, avian 
influenza, hydropericardium-hepatitis syndrome, duck plague, duck virus hepatitis, aspergillosis, candidiasis, 
thrush; Parasitic diseases: Nematode, cestode and trematode infections, avian coccidiosis, histomoniasis, 
trichomoniasis, leucocytozoonosis, avian malaria, hemoproteus infections, cryptosporidiosis, external 
parasitic infestations (flea, lice, tick, mite infestations); Metabolic, nutritional, chemical and physical diseases: 
Protein, carbohydrate, fat, vitamin and mineral deficiency diseases. arsenic, calcium, copper, lead, nitrate, 
bicarbonete, sodium chloride, potassium permanganate, organic insecticides, chlorinated hydrocarbons and 
organophosphorus poisoning, mycotoxicoses, ascites and edema, heat stress, ammonia blindness, cannibalism, 
egg eating, smothering, cage layer fatigue, acute death syndrome in broiler; Hatchery and egg-borne diseases, 
diseases of public health significance. 
 
Practical 
Demonstration of clinical signs of poultry diseases in population level; Clinical specimens: Methods of 
collection, physical examination, preservation and dispatch of specimens to the laboratory. Methods of mass 
diagnosis using clinical and holistic field data of disease in population; Methods of administration of drugs in 
mass treatment, and vaccination; Epidemiologic investigation of disease: Development of questionnaires for 
collection of data on poultry population characteristics and transmission of disease using principles and 
methods of descriptive and explanatory epidemiologic studies; Procedure of measurement of poultry health 
and disease variables; Statistical analysis of data, demonstration of association and identification of risk factors 
of poultry health and disease. Methods of management of risk factors in subsistence and commercial poultry 
flocks; Vaccination and disease control programs in subsistence and commercial poultry flocks: Planning, 
execution and evaluation of the programs, preparation of vaccination schedule; Demonstration of materials 
used in preventive and control measures and methods of administration in poultry; Development of 
questionnaires for collection of health and production data from subsistence and commercial poultry flocks; 
Procedure of measurement of poultry health and production variables and collection of data. Analysis of data 
to determine shortfalls and demonstration of shortfalls, Principles and procedure of eliminating shortfalls in 
commercial flocks; Profit oriented flock health program: Planning, execution and evaluation for various 
commodities of poultry-layer, broiler, chicks, cockerel, etc; Field trips to public and private poultry farms for 
practical exposure.  
 
 
MED 461: Metabolic and Nutritional Diseases of Farm Animals: Course Credit: 2+0 (T+P)                                   
 
Theory 
Metabolic diseases: Definition of metabolic and production diseases and their differences, Compton metabolic 
profile test, differential diagnosis of common causes of recumbency in parturient adult cattle, Milk fever, 
downer cow syndrome, bovine ketosis, pregnancy toxemia, fat cow syndrome, acute hypokalemia in cattle, 
neonatal hypoglycemia, grass tetany, lactation tetany, hypophosphataemia, post-parturient hemoglobinuria, 
azoturia; Nutritional diseases: Protein-energy deficiency diseases, vitamin-mineral deficiency diseases 
(vitamin A, D, E, B, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, cobalt, copper, iodine, iron, manganese, zinc, selenium 
deficiency diseases), rickets, osteomalacia, osteodystrophia fibrosa; Diseases caused by chemicals, poisons, 
toxins: Organophosphorus and carbamates poisoning, 
chlorinated hydrocarbon poisoning, nitrate and nitrite poisoning, hydrocyanic acid poisoning, arsenic and lead 
poisoning, urea poisoning, oxalate poisoning, poisoning by anthelmintics, snake bite, bee stings, tick paralysis; 
Diseases caused by physical agents: Environmental pollutants and noises, Radiation injuries, Brisket disease. 
Lightning stroke and electrocution, Bush fire injury, Fleece rot, burns and scalds, yoke gall. Dermatoses due 
to physical agents related to ploughing and transportation. Management and temperament of the animals due 
to thorny fruits and grass seed injuries; Diseases caused by hypersensitivity reactions: Iso-immune hemolytic 
anemia, purpura hemorrhagica, Laminitis, Allergic dermatitis, Milk allergy, Bovine atopic rhinitis; Diseases 
caused by inheritance of undesirable characters: Chromosomal anomalies, Metabolic defects, Inherited 
diseases of the different systems and organs; Diseases of uncertain etiology. 
 
MED 462: Wildlife, Zoo, Aquatic and Companion Animal Medicine: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P)                            
 
Theory 
A. Zoo and Laboratory Animal Medicine: Introduction, history and scope of Wildlife, Zoo, Aquatic and 
Companion Animal Medicine. Requirements for zoo veterinarians, Definition of related terms. 
Epidemiological significance of zoological gardens; Animal status in different zoo in Bangladesh, ethology 
(behavior) and stress in zoo animals and birds; Restraint - different methods and adverse effects of restraint; 
Principles of diagnosis of diseases of zoo and laboratory animals - dispatch of samples to the laboratory and 
laboratory methods of diagnosis; Health management of different zoo and laboratory animals; Classification, 
biological characteristics, feeds and feeding, restraint and handling and important diseases of common species 
of zoo animals and birds of the following orders, Aves, Reptiles and mammals (Marsupialia, Edentata, 
Chiroptera, Non-human prinmates, Lagomorpha, Rodentia, Carnivora, Proboscidea, Perissodactyla and 
Artiodactylia); Principles of nutrition and nutritional deficiency diseases in zoo animals and birds with their 
treatment and prevention. Zoonotic diseases of zoo and laboratory animals and birds and their prevention and 
control. B. Small Animal Medicine: Definition, causes, pathophysiology, pathogenesis, clinical characteristics 
(signalment, anamnesis, nature of onset, clinical signs, course and severity, physical findings ofspecimens), 
presumptive diagnosis, prognosis, conservative treatment and nature of response and clinical advice on the  
following important general and special diseases of pet dogs and cats in Bangladesh; General diseases: General 
systemic states- Hyperthermia, hypothermia, toxemia, weakness, syncope, obesity, cachexia; Digestive 
disorders-anorexia, inappetance, polyphagia, ptyalism, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, dysentery, 
gastroenteritis; Respiratory disorders – sneezing, nasal discharge, coughing, tachypnea, dyspnea; Urogenital 
disorders – Genital discharges, polyuria, polydipsia, urinary incontinence, urine retention, discolourtion of 
urine, proteinunia; Cardiovascular disorders-Abnormal heart sounds and pulse, hypotension, hypertension. 
Hemopoietic disorder – Anemia, polycythemia, cyanosis, jaundice, epistaxis, hemoptysis; Neurological 
disorders–Shivering, trembling, ataxia, paresis, coma, stupor, seizures, abnormal behavior; Endocrine and 
musculoskeletal disorder—Acromegaly, diabetes, hypothyroidism, lameness, swollen joint; Diseases of eye 
and ear; Skin diseases: alopecia, pruritus, skin lesions, erosive and ulcerative dermatitis; Special diseases: 
Viral diseases: Canine distemper, Canine hepatitis, Rabies, Canine parvovirus and Coronavirus infection, 
Feline panleukopenia, Kennel cough, Feline leukemia, Feline infectious anemia, Feline rhinotracheitis; 
Bacterial diseases: Salmonellosis, Campylobacteriosis, Tuberculosis, Pseudotuberculosis, Brucellosis, 
Leptospirosis, Actinomycosis, Tetanus, Botulism, Tyzzer’s Disease, Tularemia, Borreliosis, Lyme Disease, 
Streptococcosis, Cat Scratch Disease, Bubonic Plague; Fungal diseases: Dermatophytosis, Candidiasis, 
Moniliasis, Histoplasmosis, Cryptoccosis, Aspergillosis. Parasitic diseases: Protozoan diseases – Coccidiosis, 
Cryptosporidiosis, Amebiasis, Giardiasis, Toxoplasmosis, Babesiosis, Trypanosomiasis, Leishmaniasis, 
Sarcocystosis; Helminth diseases – Heartworm disease, Ascariasis, Hookworm disease, Strongyloidiosis, 
Tapeworm disease, Whipworm Disease, Giant Kidneyworm Disease, Esophageal And Stomach worm 
Disease, Trichinellosis; External parasitic infestation – Lice, Tick, Flea and Mite infestations; Non-infectious 
diseases:  Nutritional deficiency diseases, b) Diseases caused by physical and chemical agents, immunological 
disorders and cancer. 
 
Practical 
Requirement of zoo veterinarians. Methods of restraining of zoo and laboratory animals and birds. 
Demonstration of drugs and vaccines used in zoo and laboratory animals with their dose and route of 
administration. Methods of clinical examination, collection and dispatch of specimens to the laboratory for 
confirmation of diagnosis and treatment of sick zoo and laboratory animals and birds. Requirements and 
planning for establishing an ideal zoological garden and laboratory animal house. Preparations of a note book 
everything done in the practical classes. Provision for funds and transport for practical classes in zoological 
garden in Dhaka zoo and students should prepare and submit the report on practical classes held in zoo during 
final examination; Small Animal Medicine: Introduction and requirements of small animal clinic and 
responsibilities of the small animal practioners; Methods of restraining of dogs, cats and zoo and laboratory 
animals and birds; Methods of clinical diagnosis of diseases of dogs and cats- History taking, distant inspection 
and physical techniques, clinical examination of different body regions and different systems and organs of 
small animals; Methods of laboratory diagnosis-collection, physical examination, preservation and shipment 
of stools, urine, blood, skin scrapings, smears, swabs and edematous fluid. Diagnostic imaging techniques; 
Demonstration and dispensing of drugs and their doses, route of administration, duration of treatment and 
adverse drug reactions in dogs and cats; Recording of clinical cases of dogs and cats and their prescription 
writing, post-treatment evaluation and interpretation; Field trips to the Central Veterinary Hospital, Dhaka and 
other private small animal clinic for practical classes. 
 
MED 501: Forensic Medicine, Jurisprudence and Animal Welfare: Course Credit: 3+0 (T+P)        
Theory 
A. Forensic Medicine, Jurisprudence: Introduction and definition of Veterinary Forensic Medicine and 
Jurisprudence; aims, scope, uses and branches of forensic medicine; difference between forensic medicine and 
jurisprudence; legal system – criminal courts and powers; vetero-legal wounds – classification and description 
of vetero-legal wounds, differences of different wounds, determination of age of injury, vetero-legal 
importance of wound healing; common frauds in the sale of livestock and its products; Common offences 
against animals – bestiality, maiming, mischiefs and mischievous killing (poisoning, slaughtering, violence, 
starvation, strangulation and drowning); causes of sudden death; accidental deaths – lightning stroke and 
electrocution; Examination of live and dead animals in criminal cases and submission of vetero-legal 
specimens; Vetero-legal report writing; Vetero-legal evidence – hints for giving evidence and witness; 
Veterinary legislations – The Cattle-Trespass Act 1871, The cattle (prevention of trespass) ordinance 1959, 
The Poisons Act 1919, The cruelty to animals act 1920, The society for the prevention of cruelty to animals 
ordinance 1962, The Bangladesh Animal Diseases Act 2005, The Bangladesh Animal and Animal Products 
Quarantine Act 2005, The Fish Feed and Animal Feed Act 2010, The Animal Slaughter (Restriction) and Meat 
Control Act 2011, The Wildlife (conservation and security) act 2012. Organization of veterinary service in 
Bangladesh (BVC) – nature and scope of veterinary services; Professional conduct, professional malpractices, 
liability, veterinary ethics, animal insurance; B. Animal welfare: Introduction: Definition, objectives, 
concepts, indications and public perceptions. Causes of welfare problems of the following animals: Draught 
and farm animals, pet and entertainment animals, laboratory, wild and captive animals, pet birds and poultry. 
Control of animal welfare problems-Animal welfare regulations.  
 
 
MED 502: Medicine (Clinics): Course Credit: 0+2 (T+P)        
Practical 
Handling of clinical cases: Clinical/physical examination, non-laboratory field-based presumptive diagnosis, 
prognosis and conservative treatment of both general and special diseases and clinical advice for restoration 
of health in individual sick animals and birds attended at Veterinary Teaching Hospital of BSMRAU; 
Collection, physical examination and dispatch of specimens to the laboratory; Preparation of a note book 
which will include a) recording of 30 clinical cases with post-treatment evaluation and interpretation 
(approved format prescribed by the department concern). The note book is to be checked and signed by 
teacher(s) concern.   
 
Department of Microbiology and Public Health (MPH) 
 
MPH 101: Animal Hygiene and Bio-security: Course Credit: 2+1 (T+P)        
 
Theory 
Introduction: Definition of hygiene, health, disease. Classification of hygiene.  Importance of animal hygiene 
and its scope in health and production. Influence of environment on health; Soil: Definition, soil and disease. 
Sanitary improvement and sanitation of soil; Air and ventilation: Definition. Hygienic importance and effect 
of ventilation on animal health. Types of ventilation; Water: Sources of water, hygienic requirements of water, 
water contamination, water purification and examination of water; Sanitation: Definition, importance, 
drainage and sewerage system, disposal of waste, disposal of carcasses; Prevention and control of diseases: 
Hygienic measures for the prevention and control of infectious disease, isolation, quarantine, disinfection, 
disinfestation, immunization; Biosecurity program, types of biosecurity, component of biosecurity. 
Biosecurity as an international issue; Biosecurity risk assessment in laboratory, biosafety levels and 
corresponding biosecurity risk and physical security levels in laboratory; Acid rain and greenhouse effect. 
 
Practical 
Determination of health by external appearance (signs of health); Methods of recording temperature, pulse 
and respiration; Methods for the administration of medicine; Methods of bandages and clothing; Sanitary 
inspection and disinfection of different farms and surroundings. 
 
MPH 161: General Microbiology: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P)        
 
Theory 
Introduction and Clinical examination: Introduction: History and development of microbiology. 
Classification of microbes, General morphology, physiology and nutrition, cultivation, isolation, identification 
and growth of bacteria; Bacterial genetics: Nucleic acid, Plasmid, mutation, transformation, transduction and 
conjugation; Mechanism of infection: Infection, transmission of infection, route of infection, relationship of 
microorganisms to a disease, general defense mechanism of the body, virulence, factors involving the 
virulence of microorganisms; Bacterial toxins: Toxins and antitoxins, endotoxin and exotoxins, toxins 
produced by bacteria and their effect on host tissue; Sterilization and Disinfection: Methods and principles 
of sterilization, types of disinfectants and their characteristics; Morphology, physiology and nutrition, 
cultivations and toxins of Fungi, Rickettsia, Chlamydia and Mycoplasma. 
 
Practical 
Operation of microscopes; Methods of sterilization and preparation of cultural media; Microscopic study of 
living microorganisms; Staining techniques; Demonstration of bacteria in specimens; Cultivation, isolation 
and identification of bacteria; Antibiotic sensitivity test; Sterility test of glass wares and equipment’s. 
 
 
 
 
MPH 231: Systemic Bacteriology and Mycology: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P)        
Theory 
Bacteriology: Classification of bacteria. Morphological, cultural, biochemical and pathogenic characteristics 
of the organisms belonging to the following genera-Actinobacillus, Actinomyces, Aeromonas, Bacillus, 
acteriodes, Bordetella, Borrelia,Brucella, Campylobacter, Clostridium, Corynebacterium, Diplococcus, 
Enterobacter, Escherichia, Hemophilus, Klebsiella,  Leptospira,  Listeria,  Moraxella, Mycobacterium, 
Nocardia, Pasteurella, Proteus, Pseudomonas, Salmonella, Serratia, Shigella, Spheorophorus, Spirilum, 
Staphylococcus, Streptococcus,  Treponema, Vibrio and Yersinia spp; Classification, properties, 
pathogenicity, transmission and diagnosis of Mycoplasma, Rickettsia and Chlamydia of different animals and 
birds; Mycology: Important identifying characteristics and classification of following fungi- Aspergillus, 
Histoplasma, Rhinosporodium, Microsporum, Trichophyton, Candida, Cryptococcus, Sporotrichum and 
Coccidioides spp. as well as Mycotoxins. 
 
 
Practical 
Growth characteristics of organisms of different bacteria on various media; Morphological, cultural, 
biochemical and fermentation characteristics of various organisms; Bacteriological and mycological 
examination of water, milk and food stuff; Methods of cultivation and identification of Rickettsia, 
Mycoplasma and Chlamydia; Antimicrobial susceptibility testing of common pathogens isolated from clinical 
and pathological samples. 
 
 
MPH 261: Virology: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P)        
 
Theory 
Introduction: History of virology, physical, chemical and biological properties of viruses, Classification of 
viruses, Viral inactivating agents, Purification of viruses, Replication of viruses and their effect on host tissues, 
Bacteriophages, Transmission and reservoir of viruses, Viral immunity, Interference phenomenon and 
interferon, Viral vaccines and chemotherapy, Persistent infection and slow virus infections; Studies on the 
properties, cultivation, pathogenicity, transmission, immunity and diagnosis of viruses of the following 
diseases of animals and birds; Avian encephalomyelitis, Avian leukosis complex, Canine distemper, Duck 
plague, Duck viral hepatitis Foot and mouth disease, Influenza viruses, Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis, 
Infectious bronchitis, Infectious bursal disease, Infectious canine hepatitis, Infectious laryngotracheitis,  
Marek’s disease,  Mucosal disease complex, Newcastle disease, Prion, Rabies,  Rinderpest,  Rota virus 
infection, Vesicular stomatitis, Pox diseases, Feline panleucopenia, Bovine ephemeral fever, PPR and other 
important viral infection of animals and birds. 
 
Practical 
Selection, collection, transport, preservation, and preparation of virological specimens for laboratory 
examination and identification of viruses, Filters and filtration techniques; Purification of virus, analysis of 
viral proteins using sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( SDS-PAGE), Coomassie 
brilliant blue stain and Western blotting; Cultivation and titration of viruses in indicator host system (intact 
host system, embryonated eggs, tissue culture system). Assay of infectivity of viruses: plaque assay, Focus 
assay; Media, reagents and other necessary biologics prepared and used in the laboratory; Identification of 
viruses by PCR, RT-PCR; Methods of cultivation and identification of Mycoplasma, Rickettsia and 
Chlamydia; Introduction to biosafety cabinet. 
 
MPH 301: Immunology, Serology and Molecular Technique: Credit Hours: 2+1 (T+P)        
 
Theory 
Introduction: History of immunology, Immunity and resistance and their types. Development, structure and 
functions of immune system Basic phenomenon’s of immune response; Antigen: Definition, composition, 
properties of antigens, adjuvant. Types and uses of vaccines. Different types of adjuvants; Antibodies: 
Definition, composition, properties, formation and uses of antibody, Types of immunoglobulins and their 
properties and functions. Monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies and their production techniques; Cytokines 
and immune system; Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) Molecule; Complement: Definition, 
properties, and activation of complement and functions; Antigen processing, Lymphocytes, Helper T cells and 
their response to antigen, B cells and their response to antigen; T cell function and destruction of cell 
associated antigen; Regulation of immune response; Different techniques of Antigen and antibody reactions 
(eg Agglutination, precipitation, complement fixation, Enzyme Linked Immuno-sorbent Assay (ELISA), 
Fluorescent tagged antibody reaction, and neutralization, immune peroxidase); Immunologic disorder and 
their consequences; Hypersensitivity and immune tolerance; Basics of Vaccinology-Vaccines, vaccination 
and vaccination schedule. Production, evaluation, storage and transportation of vaccines; Principles of 
Molecular techniques- DNA extraction, Polymerase chain reaction and Gel electrophoresis. 
 
Practical 
Serological test:  Agglutination test, Agar gel precipitation test, complement fixation test, Enzyme Linked 
Immuno-sorbent, Assay (ELISA), Fluorescent tagged antibody reaction (FAT), Neutralization test, 
Immunoperoxidase radioimmuno assay (RIA) and Haemagglutination inhibition test; Molecular techniques: 
DNA extraction, Polymerase chain reaction and Gel electrophoresis. 
 
MPH 431: Dairy Microbiology and Food Hygiene: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P)        
 
Theory 
Introduction and significance of dairy microbiology, Sources of contamination of milk, Hygienic milk 
production; Classification of dairy microorganisms: Morphology and classification of dairy bacteria. 
Characteristics of important microorganisms, Characteristics of spoilage and pathogenic microorganisms, 
Characteristics of dairy associated fungi and bacteriophages. Microorganisms associated with milk: 
Microorganisms associated with raw milk and their significance, Role of psychrotrophs in milk, Effect of 
processing on microorganisms in milk; Microbial spoilage of milk: Role of microbes in spoilage of milk – 
Microbial interactions, Milk fermentations, Abnormal milk fermentations, contamination and spoilage of milk 
and milk product. Adulteration of milk. Diseases transmitted through milk and their significance on health. 
Bacteriological quality of milk and milk products. Mastitic milk: Mastitic milk – Suitability for processing 
and public health significance, Detection of mastitic milk. Milk borne diseases: Food infection, intoxication 
and toxic-infection, investigation of food borne disease outbreaks. Food safety practices: Microbiology in 
food plant sanitation. Food legislation, standards and codes of practices, Hazard Analysis Critical Control 
Point (HACCP); Antimicrobial substances in milk; Microbiology of market milk; Microbiology of lactic 
starter. 
 
Practical 
Qualitative and quantitative methods of milk testing; Dye reduction test; Direct microscopic count (DMC); 
Standard plate count (SPC); Coliform counts in Milk; Methods of Enumeration of other groups of bacteria; 
Enumeration of yeast and molds in Milk.  
 
 
 
 
 
MPH 501: Public Health and Zoonoses: Credit Hours: 2+0 (T+P)        
 
Theory 
Public Health: Definition, objectives, functions and activities of public health and veterinary public health; 
The common basis for veterinary and public health practices, public health team. Organization, administration 
and functions of public health; Importance of veterinary knowledge in public health; Public health aspects of 
milk production, transportation and marketing; Major obstacles of VPH delivery services in Bangladesh; 
Ante-mortem inspection, transportation of meat animal, slaughtering of meat animals and birds, pre-harvest 
and post-harvest technology foods at farms and manufacturing level; Abattoir: Principles for planning of an 
abattoir and situation in Bangladesh.; Inspection and judgment of carcass; Adulteration and misinterpretation 
of meat foods. Diseases transmitted through meat and meat products; Capacity building in public health: 
Principles and Practices of One Health approaches in Bangladesh. Zoonoses: Concept, classification and 
impact; Zoonotic diseases: Bacterial, Viral, Parasitic and Fungal zoonoses; Impact of zoonotic diseases in 
human and animal health; Prevention, control and eradication of zoonotic diseases; General methods of 
epidemiological investigation of zoonotic disease. 
 
Department of Pathobiology (PBL) 
 
PBL-231: General and Nutritional Pathology: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory 
Introduction: Definition, Branches and scope of Pathology; Cell injury, cell death and necrosis: Definition, 
causes and biochemical and ultrastructural changes of cell injury and death. Characteristics of tissues and 
necrotic cells; Apoptosis: Definition, causes, pathogenesis, morphological features, significances and effects 
of apoptotic cell death, Differentiation between accidental and apoptotic cell death; Cell death Necrosis: 
Definition, classifications, causes, gross and histopathological features, significances and effects, 
outcome/disposition of necrosis, Differentiation between necrosis and postmortem autolysis; Gangrene and 
Infarction: Definition, classifications, causes, gross and histopathological features, significances and effects, 
outcome/disposition of gangrene and infarction; Intracellular and extra cellular depositions and 
degenerations: Fatty change, extra cellular accumulation of lipids, glycogen deposition and glycogen storage 
diseases; lysosomal storage diseases; extracellular deposition of proteins-amyloid, albumin and fibrin; 
Mineral deposits and pigments: Pathologic calcifications and ossification, gout, exogenous and endogenous 
pigments; jaundice, photosensitizational dermatitis; Disturbances of growth: Development Anomalies and 
Malformation, Atrophy, Hypertrophy, Hyperplasia, Metaplasia, Hypoplasia, Aplasia, Dysplasia, Anaplasia, 
Neoplasia; Disturbances of circulation: Definition, classification, oetiology, occurrences, pathogenesis, 
changes, significances and effects of thrombosis, embolism, hyperemia and congestion, haemorrhage, oedema 
and shock; Failure to clot; Inflammation: Definition, cardinal signs, classification, oetiology, occurrences, 
pathogenesis, changes, significances and effects and; vascular and cellular events in inflammation; chemical 
mediators of inflammations; cells of inflammation; types of inflammation; Healing, Fever; 
Immunopathology: Immune response, cells related to immunity, and immune effectors mechanisms; 
hypersensitivity; autoimmunity; immunodeficiency; Extraneous poisonings: Classification of extraneous 
poisons on the baiss of pathologic features. Pathology of snake venoms, arsenics, urea, oleander, copper, 
carbon tetrachloride, gossypol, vetch, sulfonamides, selenium, dicoumarin, bracken fern, nitrate, nitric, kale, 
rape mycotoxins, organophosphates, strychnine, lathyrus, coffee senna, coyotillo; Nutritional and Metabolic 
diseases: Deficiencies of fat soluble and water soluble vitamins, deficiencies of calcium, phosphorus, iron, 
copper, zinc, iodine, deficiency of protein; ketosis, milk fever, grass tetany, rickets, osteomalacia, fibrous, 
osteodystrophy. 
 
Practical 
Methods of collection, Preservation, Fixation, processing and staining of pathological specimen and gross 
microphotographs. 
 
 
 
 
 
PBL-232: General Parasitology and Entomology: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory 
General Parasitology: Introduction to Parasitology, Basic terminology, History, Origin and Evolution of 
Parasites, Types of parasitism, Host Parasite relationship and adaptation of parasites. Injurious effects of 
parasites on their hosts, Resistance and immunity of parasites, Geographical distribution and transmission of 
parasites, Economic importance, Systematic Classification of parasites, Host and organ specificity, Parasitic 
zoonoses, definition and general pattern of life cycle of helminthes, General consideration of control measures 
against parasites; Entomology: Introduction to Entomology, Arthropods and their economic significance, 
Classification of Arthropoda, Respiratory, digestive, nervous and reproductive systems of arthropods, 
Morphology, life cycle, pathology and pathogenesis, vector role and control of the species of the following;  
Phthiraptera: Haematopinidae, Linognathidae, Pulicidae and others; Hemiptera: Cimicidae, Reduvidae; 
Siphonaptera: Pulicidae and others; Diptera: Culicidae, Ceratopogonidae, Simulidae, Psychodidae, 
Tabanidae, Gastrophilidae, Glossinidae, Muscidae, Calliphoridae, Oesteridae, Hypodermatidae, Cuterebridae, 
Hippoboscidae and others; Dictyoptera, Coleoptera, Lepidoptera, Hymenoptera; Acarina: Ixodidae, 
Argasidae, Demodicidae, Sarcoptidae, Psoroptidae, Dermanyssidae, Cheylotidae and others Pathogens 
transmitted by insects and arachnids; Biological control of arthropods; Pesticides and pesticide formulations 
and pesticide resistance 
 
Practical 
General Parasitology: Preparation of solutions used for parasitological examinations; Laboratory procedure 
for the diagnosis of parasitic infections; Methods for collection, preservation and transportation of parasitic 
materials; Qualitative and quantitative methods of estimating parasitic infection; Miscellaneous; Entomology: 
Methods for collection, shipment, fixation and preservation of arthropod samples; Methods for preparation of 
permanent mounts of insects and arachnids; Examination of skin scrapings for mange; Demonstration of wing 
venation of insects; Field visit at livestock and poultry farm for collection and identification of ectoparasites; 
Identification of the important members of the order Phthiraptera, Hemiptera, Siphonaptera, Diptera and 
Acarina; Miscellaneous; 
 
 
PBL-261: Helminthology and Malacology: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory 
Trematoda: General characteristics, general life cycle, classification of trematodes; Morphology, life cycle, 
pathology and pathogenesis, diagnosis, control/biocontrol of the species of the following: Fasciola, 
Fasciolopsis, Fascioloides, Dicrocoelium, Prosthogonimus, Eurytrema, Paramphistomum, Gastrothylax, 
Gigontocotyle, Cotylophoron, Gastrodiscus, Homalogaster, Metagonimus, Paragonimus, Echinostoma, 
Catatropis, Schistosoma, Nanophyetus, Ornithobilharzia, Opisthorchis, Clonorchis and other veterinary 
important genera; Nematodes: General characteristics, general life cycle, classification of nematodes: 
Morphology, life cycle, pathology and pathogenesis, diagnosis, control/biocontrol of the species of the 
following: Ascaris, Parascaris, Toxascaris, Toxocara, Oxyuris, Enterobius, Heterakis,  Asaridia, Subulura, 
Strongyloides, Chabertia, Oesophagostomum, Stephanurus, Ancylostoma, Stephanurus, Ancylostoma, 
Necator, Uncinaria, Bunoatomum, Trichostrongylus, Ostertagia, Cooperia, Haemonchus,   Dictyocaulus, 
Metastrongylus, Protostrongylus, Angiostrongylus, Habronema, Thelazia, Spirocerca, Parafilaria, Setaria, 
Gongylonema, Tetremeres, Gnathostoma, Dirofilaria, Wuchereria, Loa, Dipetalonema, Onchocerca, 
Dracunculus, Trichuris, Capillaria, Trichinella, Dioctophyma and other veterinary important genera; Cestoda: 
General characteristics, general life cycle, classification of cestodes Morphology, life cycle, pathology and 
pathogenesis, diagnosis, control/biocontrol of the species of the following: Taenia, Echinococcus, Moniezia, 
Anoplocephala, Paranoplocephala, Davainea, Raillietina, Cotugnia, Stilesia, Thysanosoma, Avitellina, 
Amoebotaenia, Choanotaenia, Metroliasthes, Dipylidium, Hymenolepis, Diphyllobothrium, Mesocestoides, 
Spirometra and other veterinary important genera; Malacology: A brief introduction to Malacology; 
Classification, Morphology, Biology and Ecology of common fresh water snails; Important genera and species 
of snails involved in the life cycle of parasites; Control of Veterinary Important snails. 
 
 
 
Practical 
Helminthology: Laboratory procedure for the diagnosis of trematodes, nematode and infections; 
Identification of helminth eggs; Identification of metacestodes; Identification of nematode larvae; Preparation 
of permanent slides; Preparation of temporary slide and supravital staining; Identification of important 
members of Trematoda, nematodes and Cestoda; Microscopic mesearument of helminthes and their eggs. 
Practical demonstration of helminths at slaughter house; Malacology: Collection and shipment of snails; 
Morphological study of snails and their identification; Examination of snails for the recovery of cercariae; 
Miscellaneous; 
 
 
 
PBL-301: Protozoology: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory 
History of Protozoology, Anatomy of Protozoa, Nutrition, locomotion, reproduction and excretion of 
Protozoa, Classification of Protozoa, Morphology, life cycle, diagnosis, pathogenesis and control of the 
following species of genera: Trypanosoma, Leishmania, Tritichomonas, Trichomonas, Hexamita, 
Histomonas, Giardia, Entamocba, Eimeria, Isospora, Toxoplasma, Sarcocystis, Neospora, Cryptospordia, 
Plasmodium Haemoproteus, Leucocytozoon, Hepatozoan, Babesia, Theileria, Balantidium, Anaplasma, 
Ehrlichia, Eperythrozoan, Hemobartonella and others.  
 
 
Practical  
Qualitative and quantitative fecal examination for protozoa; Blood examination for protozoa; Examination of 
crop and genital discharges for Trichomonas; Microscopic measurement of Protozoa; Identification of 
important members of Protozoa; Miscellaneous; 
 
 
PBL-302: Systemic Pathology and Oncology: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory 
Oetiology, Pathogenesis, Lesions, Signs, Significances and effects, Diagnosis of the disorders of the following 
systems:  Digestive system; Respiratory system; Urinary system; Genital system; Cardiovascular system; 
Musculoskeletal system; Skin and appendages; Haemopoietic and Lymphatic systems; Endocrine system; 
Nervous system and Organs of Special Senses. 
 
Oncology  
Definition, scope and importance of oncology; Neoplaisa: Definition, classification, differentiation between 
benign and malignant tumors; Brief description of important neoplasms including etiology, pathogenesis and 
prognosis; Diagnosis of cancer; Immune against cancer;  
 
Practical 
Techniques of preservation of pathological specimen: Processing of tissurs; Preparation and staining of 
microslides. Practical demonstration of pathological museum specimens and gross micro photographs 
 
 
 
PBL-331: Pathology of Infectious Diseases: Credit Hours: 3+0 (T+P) 
 
Theory 
Itoduction to general pathogenesis and pathology of infectious diseases: Bacterial Diseases: Pathogenesis 
and pathology of different  bacterial diseases of animals with special emphasis on anthrax,  clostridial 
infections, streptococcal and staphylococcal infarctions, camphylobacter infections, colibacillosis, brucellosis, 
tularemia, salmonellosis, actinobacillosis, pasteurellosis, yersiniosis, listeriosis, leptospirosis borreliosis, 
corynebacterium infections, tuberculosis, paratuberculosis, and mycoplasmosis; Viral Diseases: Pathogenesis 
and pathology of important viral diseases of animals with special with special emphasis on pox, infectious 
bovine rhinotracheitis, bovine malignant catarrh, infectious canine hepatitis, papillomatosis, canine parvovirus 
infection, foot and mouth disease, African horse sickness, rotavirus infections, bovine virus diarrhoea- 
mucosal disease, hog cholera, equine viral arteritis, canine distemper, rinderpest, rabies, bovine ephemeral 
fever, equine infectious anemia, bovine spongiform encephalopathy; Fungal diseases: Pathogenesis and 
pathology of important viral diseases of animals with special with special emphasis on Aspergillosis, 
Blastomycosis, Coccidioidomycosis, Cryptococcosis, Histoplasmosis, Candidiasis and Dermatomycoses; 
Rickettsiel Diseases: Pathogenesis and pathology of important viral diseases of animals with special with 
special emphasis on Typhus fever, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Scrub typhus, Qever, Salmon disease of 
dogs, “Heart water”, Tickborne fever and Bovine petechial fever, Bartenellosis, Anaplasmosis, 
Haemobartonellosis, Eperythrozoonosis. Chlamydial Diseases: Pathogenesis and pathology of important 
viral diseases of animals with special with special emphasis on Psittacosis, Sporadic bovine encephalomyelitis, 
Polyarthritis, Enzootic bovrtion, Enzootic ovine and caprine abortion and Pneumonoa 
 
 
PBL-361: Avian Pathology: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory 
Introduction: Present situation of poultry diseases and biosecurity status in Bangladesh; Bacterial Diseases: 
Salmonellosis, colibaciollosis, pasturellsis, infectious coryza, tuberculosis, strptocoocosis, staphylocoocosis; 
Viral Diseases: Infectious bursal disease, Newcastle disease, Marek’s disease, avian leucosis, fowl pox, 
infectious bronchitis, infectious laryngotracheitis, avian influenza, chicken infectious anaemia, egg drop 
syndrome, duck plague, duck viral hepatitis, viral arthritis; Parasitic Diseases: Ascardiasis and other 
nematodiasis, tapeworm infection, coccidiosis, infestation by ectoparasites; Fungal Diseases: Aspergillosis, 
thrush, canadidiasis; Mycoplasmal and Chlamydal Diseases: Avian mycoplsmosis avian mycoplamosis, 
avian chlamydiosis; Non-infectious Diseases: Deficiencies of fat soluble and water soluble vitamins, 
deficiencies of calcium, phosphorus, copper, zinc, deficiencies of amino acids and protein, calories ad water; 
common vices, mycotoxicosis and other poisonings; Diseases of complex or unknown etiology: Gout, 
multicausal respiratory disease, hydro pericardium hepatitis, syndrome, ascites and right ventricular 
hypertrophy, enteric disease complex, spiking mortality syndrome.  
 
Practical 
Study of virus poultry diseases using laboratory specimens, histopathological slides illustrations and 
transparencies. Postmortem examinations and interpretations 
Field Trip 
Visiting the poultry farm for acquiring practical knowledge of farming.  
 
PBL-501: Clinical Pathology and Necropsy: Credit Hours: 0+2 (P) 
 
Practical 
Clinical Pathology: Introduction: Definition and scope of clinical pathology and necropsy, setting up a 
clinical pathology laboratory, cleaning and maintenance of glassware and instruments used in clinical 
pathology, Preparation of various buffers, stains and reagents; Clinical haematology: Methods of collection 
of blood, serum and plasma. Routine hematological test-total erythrocyte count, total leukocyte count, 
hemoglobin estimation, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, packed cell volume tests for coagulation disorders; 
interpretation of hematological findings in animals and birds; Clinical biochemistry: Clinical tests for urine 
and their interpretations. Tests for heart, muscles, liver, kidney, pancreas and bone function with their 
interpretations; Clinical diagnosis of parasitic diseases: Qualitative and quantitative examination of faecal 
samples. Examination of skin scrapings; Clinical laboratory diagnosis of bacterial and fungal infections: 
Methods of sample collection, culture, common staining and antibiotic sensitivity tests; Techniques of 
Immunodiagnosis: ELISA, agar gel precipitation test, haemagglutination and haemagglutination inhibition 
tests.; Collection and examination of biopsy materials and clinical cytoloty; Methods of writing clinical report; 
Necropsy: Techniques of postmortem examination of animals and poultry: interpretations of post-mortem 
findings, Selection, collection, preservation and shipment of pathological specimens to the diagnostic 
laboratories for diagnosis of specific disease or disease conditions; Methods of disposal of carcasses. Methods 
of recording of necropsy findings and writing report. 
 
 
 
 Department of Physiology and Pharmacology (PHP) 
 
PHP 161: General Physiology: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory 
Introduction to Physiology: Definition, branches, objectives and scopes of physiology; The Cell: Definition, 
cell concept, organization and functions of the cell; Membrane Physiology- osmosis, Simple diffusion, 
Fascilated diffusion, filtration, ultra-filtration, dialysis, surface tension, suspensoids, emulsoids, absorption, 
adsorption, inhibition, Na- K ATPase system, phagocytosis, pinocytosis. Transport through cell membrane, 
Membrane potential, Action potential, Donan’s theory of membrane Equilibrium; Physiology of blood and 
body fluids: Properties of blood, composition and function of blood, plasma and serum, Origin and 
development of erythrocytes (Erythropoiesis), structure composition and function of erythrocyte, Hemoglobin 
and its derivatives, Physiological hemolysis, Fate of erythrocytes, anemia and its type, polycythemia and its 
type, effect of anemia and polycythemia, hemagglutination and blood groups, cross matching, erythroblastosis 
fetalis, Leukocytes- Leukopoiesis, structure and function of leukocytes, types of leukocytes, life span of 
leukocytes, leukemia and its effects. Pus, Thrombocytes-Thrombopoiesis, structure and function of 
thrombocytes, hemostasis and blood coagulation, natural anticoagulant, fibrinolysis, Plasma protein and its 
function, edema, Lymph- formation, composition and function, Tissue fluids- intracellular and extracellular 
fluid; Temperature regulation, basal metabolism and homeostasis: Poikilothermism and Homeothermism, 
body temperature, heat balance, physiological responses to heat and cold, regulation of body temperature, 
Reaction to extreme environmental temperature, Basal Metabolic Rate (BMR), Fever, mechanism of fever, 
Hypothermia, Hyperthermia, feedback mechanism, reaction of solution (PH), acid- base balance; Physiology 
of sense organs: Perception, general characteristics of perception and sensory modalities, physiology of Skin 
(receptors and functions), physiology of olfaction (Nerve of olfaction and its pathways), physiology of vission 
(rhodopsin cycle, pathways, types and errors of vision), physiology of audition (nerve of auditory, labyrinth, 
mechanism of hearing and auditory pathways) and physiology of gustation (Taste buds, definition and 
classification of taste, adaptation of taste and taste pathways). 
 
 
Practical 
Measurement of Respiration, Pulse and Temperature of different animals and birds; Methods of collection and 
preservation of blood, plasma and serum from various species of animals; Preparation and uses of 
anticoagulants; Total Erythrocyte Count (TEC) – Principle, method, interpretation and precautions; Total 
Leukocyte Count (TLC) – Principle, method, interpretation and precautions; Differential Leukocyte Count 
(DLC)- Principle, method, interpretation and precautions, absolute number of leukocyte count; Hemoglobin 
determination -Principle, method, interpretation and precautions; Blood Grouping; Packed Cell Volume 
(PCV); Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) 
Clotting time and bleeding time; Hemolysis and hematin test; Isolation and perfusion of organs from live 
laboratory animals; Separation, Preservation and culture of cell from different organs of laboratory animals. 
 
PHP 201: Systemic Physiology: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P) 
Theory 
Physiology of respiratory System: Respiratory apparatus, types of respiration, mechanism of respiration, 
respiration of newborn; Types of breathing, volumes of air respired, intrapulmonary pressure; intrathoracic 
pressure, Pulmonary compliance. Pneumothorax, respiratory rates, composition of inspired and expired air, 
transport and exchange of blood gases; Regulation of respiration; Respiration in birds, Hypoxia, 
Hypoventilation, Decompression sickness. 
Physiology of urinary system: Function of kidney, Urine. Mechanism of urine formation and composition, 
renal threshold, Plasma clearance, rennin- angiotensin pathway, control of renal excretion, Micturition, urine 
of birds. 
Physiology of Muscles: Types, properties and functions of muscles, isotonic isometric contraction; Tetanus, 
changes in muscle during contraction, rigor mortis; Smooth muscle and its contraction. 
Physiology of nervous system: Function of Neuron, nerve fibers, glial cell, synapse. Nerve impulse and 
stimuli, receptors and perception, Function of Brain, Spinal cord and peripheral nerves. Autonomic nervous 
system- classification and functions. Reflex action, postural and condition reflexes. 
Physiology of Cardio vascular system: Origin and conduction of heart beat, theories of heart beat, course of 
circulation- systemic, coronary, pulmonary and portal circulation, cardiac cycle, cardiac output, 
electrocardiogram; Heart sounds, venous return, Regulation of the heart rate, blood pressure, vasomotor 
mechanisms. 
Physiology of Endocrine system: Introduction of Hormone and receptors, classification, mode of action, 
regulation of hormone secretion. Hormones of Hypothalamus, pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, adrenal, pineal, 
pancreas, testis, ovary, corpus luteum, uterus and placenta – their secretions, mode of action and function. 
Reproductive Physiology: 
Male: Spermatogenesis, transportation of spermatozoa, semen, capacitation. Preservation of spermatozoa for 
artificial insemination, Thermoregulation of testis. Male sex hormones, their mode of action and functions. 
Female: Functions of ovary, folliculogenesis, ovulation and transport of ova, Puberty, Factors influence 
puberty, estrous cycle, menstrual cycle, corpus luteum- its formation and function, fertilization, cleavage and 
implantation, gestation, lactation. 
 
Practical  
Urine- a) general chemistry, (b) Physical examination of urine e.g. volume, color, odor, transparency (c) 
Determination of specific gravity of urine (d) estimations of ammonia, chlorides, phosphates, (e) Tests for 
abnormal constituents of urine, e.g. Acetone and aceto acetic acid, glucose, albumin, bile pigments, bile salts, 
blood, pus; Examination of blood biochemistry; Use of apparatus for data acquisition-cardiac function, tension 
measurement of blood vessels, summation, tetanus and fatigue of muscle; Arterial blood pressure 
measurement (clinical); Measurement of respiratory volumes and capacity; Oxygen content and oxygen 
capacity of blood; Pregnancy test: Pregnancy determination by barium chloride test, Urine test strips; 
Hormonal analysis of biological fluids; Normal Physiology of reproductive organs, Routine examination of 
semen (collection and evaluation of semen); General knowledge on radioimmunoassay and enzyme 
immunoassay. 
 
PHP 231: Nutritional Physiology: Credit Hours: 2+0 (T+P) 
Theory  
Physiology of Digestion: Physiology of digestion, Organs of digestion, Factors of digestion- Mechanical. 
Chemical and Biological, Digestion in mouth, salivary glands and their secretions, composition of saliva, 
secretion from stomach/gastric juice and its other biochemical processes in the stomach, Control of secretion 
and motility of Stomach, Intestinal movement, hunger contraction, thirst, vomiting, pancreatic juice and its 
composition and function, Regulation of pancreatic secretion, Digestion of carbohydrate, protein and fat. 
Physiology and microbiology of rumen: Establishment of rumen microbes, microbial population, rumen 
environment, types and nutrient requirements by rumen microbes. Ruminal digestion of different types of 
feed. 
Physiology of Absorption and metabolism of nutrients: Definition and classification of nutrients, field of 
nutrient, functions, deficiencies (essentiality of nutrients in animal health and production), sources of nutrients. 
Absorption (site, routes and mechanism) and metabolism of CHOs, proteins, fats, minerals, vitamins and 
water. Deficiency symptoms in animal and birds, Nutrients exchange and utilization by body tissue, Factors 
affecting metabolism. 
Digestion absorption and metabolism of nutrients of birds: Digestion in birds, absorption and metabolism 
of nutrients in poultry. 
Physiology of Growth and Behavior: Growth curve, Measurement of growth, body measurements, prenatal 
and postnatal growth, Factors affecting live weight growth, the observation and recording of farm animal 
behavior, classification and description of farm animal behavior. 
 
 
 
 
PHP 261: General Pharmacology andTherapeutics: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P) 
Theory  
General Pharmacology 
Introduction: Definition of pharmacology and its branches, historical development of pharmacology, scope 
of pharmacology, Definition, sources and composition of drug, Drug standards, assay and regulation, Drug 
dosage forms, Prescription writing, Drug nomenclature and classification; Pharmacokinetics: 
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, Methods and routes of administration of drug, Factors altering drug 
response, Principle of drug activity, Drug incompatibility and adverse drug effects, Receptors and Drug-
receptor theory; Therapeutics-Chemotherapy: Definition and basic principles of chemotherapy (General 
consideration), Different chemotherapeutics (Drugs of antimicrobial, local anti-infective drugs-antiseptics and 
disinfectants); Antibiotics: Definition, classification of antibiotic with chemistry ( Based on mode of action, 
spectrum of activity, bacteriostatic or bacteriocidal) Ideal features, sensitivity and the ways of resistance of 
antibiotic, Dose, mode of action, pharmacokinetics, residues in food animals, bacterial resistants, Toxicity 
(Acute and chronic), contraindication and precautions of different antibiotics (β-lactam penicillin, 
Tetracycline and Chloramphenicol, Aminoglycosides, Macrolids, Cephalosporin and Miscellaneous 
antibiotics); Sulphonamides: History, chemistry, classifications, commonly used sulphonamides with doses, 
potentiated sulphonamides, clinical uses and microbial susceptibility (sensitivity and resistance) of 
sulphonamides (Antibacterial spectrum), Mechanism of antibacterial action of sulphonamides, 
Pharmacokinetics of sulphonamides, Residues of sulphonamides in food animals, Toxicity (Acute and 
chronic), contraindication and precautions of sulphonamides, Fluroquinolones and miscellaneous; 
Anthelmintics: Definition and classification of anthelmintics, antinematodal, anticestodal, antitrematodal 
drugs with their doses, mode of action, pharmacokinetics, indications, toxicities, contraindication and 
precautions; Antiprotozoal drug, antiarthropodal drug, antifungal drug, antiviral drug, antineoplastic drug and 
immunomodulatory agents; An introduction to gene therapy; Herbal drugs: Identification, active 
principle/ingredients, indication, contraindication and side effects of different important medicinal plant with 
their therapeutics. 
  
Practical  
Identification of various instruments used in pharmacology, Weights and measures; Identification, preparation 
and study of actions and dosages of common veterinary drugs; Study of the actions of drugs on laboratory 
animals; Preparation of solution (Iodine, acriflavin and calcium borogluconate), lotion (Boric acid lotion), 
Ointments (Iodine, Sulphonamides and Whitfield’s), liniments (ABC), Paste (BIPP) and powder (Dusting), 
pills, tablet, capsule, bolus; Group discussion, interpretation and presentation of antimicrobial drugs (Bacteria, 
virus and fungus), Anthelmintics, antiprotozoal, ant arthropodal drugs, Local anti-infective drugs, 
  
PHP 301: Systemic Pharmacology: Credit Hours 3+0 (T+P) 
Theory  
Digestive Pharmacology: Introduction, Drugs use in gastro-intestinal tract’s disorders (Sialics and 
Antisialics, Demulcents, stomachics, Emetics and antiemetics, Carminative and Antizymotics, Intestinal 
astringents, Antidiarrheal, Antacids, Cathartic drugs (Laxatives and Purgatives), Different tonics of digestive 
system; Respiratory Pharmacology: Introduction, Drugs for cough and bronchial asthma (Pharyngeal 
demulcents, Expectorants, Mucolytics, Antitussive, Antihistamines and bronchodilators), membrane 
shrinking drugs and respiratory stimulants; Urinary Pharmacology: Introduction, Drugs acting on kidney 
(Diuretics and Antidiuretics), Drugs altering the pH of the urine (Urinary acidifiers and Alkalizers), Drugs 
which alter the excretion of organic molecules, Urinary antiseptics and kidney tonic; Pharmacology of heart 
and circulatory system: Introduction, drugs affecting myocardial contractility and rhythmicity ,drugs 
affecting heart, vasculature and peripheral circulation, antihypertensive drug, heart tonic, heart stimulant and 
depressant, Cardiac glycosides; Haematopoietic pharmacology: Introduction, anti-anaemic, haemostatic, 
coagulant and anti-coagulants, Blood volume expanders and fluid therapy; Pharmacology of nervous 
system: Introduction, Depressant (General depressant: sedative, Hypnotics or soporifics, Narcotics, 
Analgesics or Anodynes, Tranquillizers, Anesthetics, Sympatholytic and parasympatholytic drugs, Ganglionic 
blocking drugs) Stimulants (Sympathomimetic and parasympathomimetic drugs); Endocrine Pharmacology: 
Introduction, Classification of drugs affecting the endocrine system (Hormones and related drugs) with their 
pharmacological effects, interpretation of mechanism of actions, pharmacokinetics, indications, toxicities, 
contraindication and precautions; Nutritional Pharmacology: Introduction, Supplementation of nutrients as 
drugs (Vitamins, Minerals and trace elements); Dermatologic and ophthalmic pharmacology: Introduction, 
Study of the drugs acting locally on the skin, mucous membranes, eyes and ears; Prophylactic 
Pharmacology: Introduction, Study of vaccine, sera and diagnostic agents; Miscellaneous Drugs: Autacoids 
and anti-inflammatory drugs with special reference to histamine, antihistamine, H1 and H2 blocker, Serotonin, 
Bradykinin, Angiotensin, prostaglandin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. 
 
 
 
PHP 331: Toxicology: Credit Hours: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory 
General Toxicology: Introduction: Definition and classification of toxicology, Definition of some 
toxicology related terminology (Poison, Toxin, Toxicity, Hazards and Lethal dose 50 etc), Sources of 
poisoning, Classification of toxicants, Toxicokinetic (Absorption, distribution, Biotransformation and 
excretion of toxicants), Mechanisms of poison, Fundamentals of toxicology, Factors altering the action of 
poisons, General diagnosis, collection and sending of materials for toxicological analysis and general 
treatment of poisoning. Clinical Toxicology-Poisonous plants: Cyanogenetic, estrogenic and teratogenic 
plants, Plants producing lathyrism, Plants producing oxalate, Plants producing photosensitization, oleander, 
Castor bean, Datura, Strychnine, Ergot, Ipomoea, Abrus, Nuxvomica poisoning; Inorganic Poisons: Iodine, 
Fluoride, Phosphorous, Arsenic, lead, mercury, selenium, Copper, Molybdenum, Iron, Zinc and Thallium, 
sodium chloride, Ammonia, Ammonia compounds and Urea; Organic poisons: Anesthetics, acetylcholine, 
adrenaline, anthelmintics, antibiotics and sulfonamides; Pesticides: Botanical insecticides, organochlorine 
compounds, organophosphate and organ carbamate compounds, Acaricides, Insecticides, fungicides, 
herbicides, Fumigants and rodenticides; Fungal and bacterial toxins: Mycotoxins and bacterial toxins; 
Poisonous Animals: Honey, bees, wasps, Ants, Snakes etc; Environmental toxicology: Various agents 
causing environmental pollution, i.e. soil, air and water pollution. Food additives and contaminants. Drug and 
chemical residues in the edible tissues of animals. Radiation and radioactive materials. Green house effects; 
Miscellaneous poisons: Plants and chemicals producing teratogenic, mutagenic, carcinogenic and allergic 
conditions. 
 
Practical: 
Identification, characterization of common poisonous plants available in Bangladesh; General diagnostic 
procedure for different poisoning cases; Collection, preservation and sending of specimens for toxicological 
analysis; Laboratory diagnosis of poisons (Cyanide, Nitrate, Arsenic, mercury and Mycotoxin) etc. 
 
PHP 501: Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacy: Credit Hours: 0+2 (T+P) 
Practical:  
Collection, preparation, packaging and preservation of solution, suspension, capsules, tablet, paste, emulsion, 
ointment, etc. Compounding and dispensing of various preparations; Pharmaceutical dosage forms and 
packaging; Collection, identification and use of common indigenous medicinal plants and plant extract; 
Techniques used for the assessment of antibiotics, anthelmintics, anti- inflammatory drugs, antiseptics and 
other common drugs; Clinical aspects of rational safe and effective drug therapy; Drug therapy of individual 
disease, introduction of new medicines; Techniques of transfusion and Infusion, Measurement of 
Hemodynamic in rat and mice; Methods of drug administration. 
 
Field trip:  
Three days to visit various pharmaceuticals companies/industries (Pharmaceutical Preparation Packaging, 
Pharmaceutical quality control). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Surgery and Radiology (SRA) 
 
SRA 361:  General Surgery: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory: 
Introduction: Definition of common surgical terms and methods of therapy; Principles of 
surgery: Preoperative consideration of animals, inflammation, suppuration and abscess formation, affections 
of uropygeal gland in bird, contusions, fibrosis and sclerosis, wounds, ulceration, necrosis, gangrene, sinus, 
fistula, cysts, tumors, haematoma, lymphangitis, edema, emphysema, physical lesions, affections of joints, 
fractures and repair of bones, yoke gall, hemorrhage and homeostasis, burns and scalds, frost bite, shock and 
its management, cryosurgery, paracentasis, asepsis and antisepsis; Surgical affections causing 
lameness: Definition, classification, etiology, clinical signs, diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of different 
foot diseases causing lameness; Fluid therapy: Different types of fluids, assessment of fluid deficit, 
administration of fluids, electrolyte and acid-base balance, transfusion of physiological fluids, blood and blood 
plasma. 
 
Practical: 
General considerations for surgery: Preparation of patient and surgeon, restraint of animals, identification 
and use of instruments, sterilization of surgical instruments, dressing, bandaging, sutures and suture materials, 
different types of knots, operative technique, haemostasis, practice of fluid therapy and blood transfusion; 
Passing of stomach tube, probang and catheter in domestic animals, nerve blocking, parenteral injection of 
drugs, techniques of diagnosis and treatment of lameness, common minor operations in domestic animals, 
parenthesis abdominis in bovine. 
  
 
SRA 401: Anesthesiology: Credit Hours: 2+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory: 
Definition of common terms, general consideration for anaesthesia, Classification of anaesthesia and 
anaesthetics, mode of action of anaesthetics, stages of anaeasthesia; Principles of sedation and 
premeditation: Indication, agents used and their doses in different species; Muscle relaxants: Drugs used 
and their doses in various species; Local and regional analgesia: Topical analgesia, paravertebral, field block, 
epidural, corneal, auriculopalpebral, supra-orbital, mandibular, infra-orbital, planter, perineal, pubic nerve 
block, intravenous regional analgesia; General anaesthesia and anaesthetics: Injectable agents-Chloral 
hydrate, barbiturates, dissociative agents, steroid and other agents. Inhalation agents-Chloroform, diethylether, 
halothane, methoxyflurane, enflurane, isoflurane, nitrous oxide, and cychlopropane. Anaesthsia of zoo and 
laboratory animals and birds. Hazards of anesthesia and their management; Euthanasia: Indications, various 
methods and agents used. 
 
Practical: 
Preanaeshetic examination and preparations of the animal. Orientation with different anaesthetics and devices 
used for administration of anaesthetics; Demonstration of local, regional and general anesthesia in various 
species; Monitoring of anaesthesia- central nervous system function, cardiovascular function, respiratory 
function, temperature and urine output; Management of anesthetic hazards. 
  
SRA 402: Radiology and Imaging: 2+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory: 
Introduction, definition of common terms, properties of X-rays, X-ray machine, production of X-ray imaging, 
exposure factors, positioning of animals, exposure and processing of films, contrast media; Quality of a 
radiograph, interpretation of radiographs, radiographic artifacts, diagnostic radiography, principles of 
ultrasonography, fluoroscopy, endoscopy, computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
and light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation (LASER); Principles and application of 
radiotherapy in veterinary practice. Radiation hazards and safety; Soundness: Introduction, causes of 
unsoundness; unsoundness due to hereditary and acquired diseases, systemic examination, conformation, 
colour and markings, vices, blemishes, examination of animals and birds for soundness. 
  
Practical: 
Radiographic equipment and accessories, preparation of animals and birds for taking radiographs, estimation 
of exposure factors, contrast media, methods of taking and processing radiographs, viewing of X-ray film, use 
of infra-red and ultraviolet rays; Radiographic artifacts and interpretation of radiographs. Radiographic safety 
measures. Management of X-ray film and dark rooms. Method of examination of animals and birds for 
soundness and certificate writing. 
  
 
SRA 431:  Farm Animal Surgery: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory: 
Opthalmic surgery: Examination of eye, ectropion, entropion, ocular foreign keratitis, keratocele, 
keratoconjunctivitis, corneal opacity, periodic opthalmia, uveitis, cataract, glaucoma, hydropthalmia, 
panophthalmia, parasite in the eye, dermoid cyst; Respiratory affections: Epistaxis, haemoptysis, foreign 
bodies and parasites in the nostrils, retropharyngeal abscess, roaring; Gastrointestinal surgery: Ranula, 
chocking, oesophageal stricture and diverticulum, surgical approaches to the abdomen, foreign bodies in the 
stomach, bloat, impaction, traumatic reticuloperitonitis, abomasal displacement and torsion, intestinal 
obstruction, intussusceptions, volvulus, intestinal anastomosis, rectal prolapse, atresia coli, atresia recti, atresia 
ani, other surgical diseases of abdomen and various hernias; Urogenital surgery: Pyelonephritis, 
hydronephrosis, obstruction of urethra, urolithiasis, rupture of the bladder and urethra, retention of urine, 
urinary fistula, surgical affections of the penis and prepuce; Udder and teat surgery: Supernumerary teats, 
imperforate teats, fissure of teats, obstruction in the teat, duct, fistula, papilloma, abscess and diseases; 
Miscellaneous affections: Hydrocepthalus, empyema of sinus, disbudding and dehorning, actinomycosis, 
cleft palate, contracted tendon, sinus affections, neoplasm and their modern therapy; Affections of head and 
neck: Fistula withers, poll evil, hump sore, botryomycosis and gid disease. 
 
Practical: 
Clinical practice: Surgery of the clinical patients at Veterinary Teaching Hospital (VTH)- abscess, cyst, 
tumor, septic wound infections etc; Anaesthesia and analgesia related to specific operations; Amputation of 
tail, digit, limb, trephining of sinuses, tracheotomy, oesophagetomy, entropion and ectropion operation, 
enucleation of eyeball, castration and caponisation, urethrotomy, ligation of Stenson’s ducts, opening of 
guttural pouch, roaring operation, penile deviation, vasectomy, cystotomy, amputation of penis, Caslick’s 
operation, episisotomy, tenotionies, gastrotomy, rumenotomy, enterotomy, enterectomy, intestinal 
anastomoses, spleenectomy, nephrectomy. 
  
SRA 461: Wildlife, Zoo, Aquatic and Companion Animal Surgery: Course Credit: 2+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory: 
Anaesthesia and analgesia related to specific operations in wildlife, zoo and companion animals. Amputation 
of tail, digit, declawing, aural resection in dogs, entropion and ectropion operation, enucleation of eyeball, 
abscess, castration, caponization, ovariohysterectomy, ceasarean section, urethrotomy, cystotomy, 
ventriculochordectomy (debarking), tracheotomy, oesophagotomy, gastrotomy, enterotomy, enterectomy, 
intestinal anastomoses, spleenectomy, cholecystectomy, trephining of sinus, ligation of Stention’s ducts, 
opening of guttural pouch, roaring operation, penile deviation, vasectomy, amputation of penis, Caslick’s 
operation, trocarization, tenotomy, nephrectomy. 
  
Practical: 
Clinical diagnosis and treatment of surgical disease and disorders in Wildlife, Zoo, Aquatic and companion 
animals and birds at the Veterinary Teaching Hospital (VTH), ambulatory surgical services at different zoos, 
national parks, safari park and other field stations, clinical practices of surgical cases at various government 
and private veterinary hospitals, clinics safari park, and zoo. 
  
SRA 501: Surgery (Clinics): Course Credit: 0+2 (T+P) 
Practical: 
Clinical diagnosis and treatment of surgical disease and disorders in animals and birds at the Veterinary 
Teaching Hospital (VTH), ambulatory surgical services at various farms and field stations, clinical practices 
of surgical cases at various government and private veterinary hospitals, clinics and zoo. 
 
 
Department of Agricultural Economics (AEC) 
AEC 201: Livestock Production Economics: Course Credit: 3+0 (T+P) 
Theory 
Definition and scope of economics, microeconomics and macroeconomics, economics - as a science and as 
an art, economic systems operating in the world, importance of livestock production economics, utility, 
characteristics of utility, kinds of utility, total utility and diminishing marginal utility, total and marginal 
utility, maximization of utility, indifference curve, indifference map, budget line, consumer equilibrium, 
demand and law of demand, exceptions in law of demand, determinant of demand, factors affecting demand, 
types of demand, supply and law of supply, supply schedule and supply curve, factors affecting changes in 
supply, market equilibrium, definition of elasticity of demand, price, income and cross  elasticity of demand, 
factors affecting price elasticity of demand, point and arc elasticity, factors of production, concepts of land, 
labour, capital and organization and their related aspects, production function,  the law of three stages of 
production, cost and revenue concepts, different types of cost like fixed cost, variable cost, enterprise costing 
and budgeting, equilibrium of firm, equilibrium of firm, the concept of market, definition and function of 
money, inflation, deflation, banking concept, concepts of national income. 
 
 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (BMB) 
  
BMB 131: Biophysics and Chemistry of Biomolecules: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory: 
Basics of Biophysics and Molecular Biology: basic concept of biophysics that applies in biological 
phenomena, Law of mass action. Water, acids, bases and electrolytes, pH and buffers. Surface tension. 
Viscosity. Adsorption. Colloidal state and membrane phenomenon. Diffusion and Osmosis. 
Spectrophotometry, Electrophoresis, Isoelectric focusing chromatography. Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology and various terms related to this subject, the scope and importance of biomolecules, overview on 
Biomolecules and their relationships in biological system; Carbohydrates: Definition and classification 
carbohydrates on the basis of structure and functions, different functions of carbohydrates, different sources 
of carbohydrates, monosaccharides, aldoses, ketoses, and to illustrate properties and stereochemistry of 
monosaccharides; isomerism, D-, L-isomers, chiral carbon, optical activity, racemic mixtures, messo-
compound, enantiomers and diastereoisomers, cyclization of monosaccharides, mutarotation and derivatives 
of monosaccharides, functions of disaccharides, trisaccharides, polysaccharides, glyosidic linkages, reducing 
and non-reducing sugars, and structural features of starch, glycogen, cellulose, chitin, dextran, and 
heteropolysaccahrides like heparin, hyaluronic acids, Keratan sulfate etc; Proteins: Discovery of amino acids, 
amino acids, and proteins, and to explore the functions and properties of amino acids and proteins, 
classification amino acids and understand the general structure of amino acids and proteins, peptide bond 
formation and the features of peptide bond, structural organization, properties and functions of proteins; 
Enzymes: Brief history of enzymes, definition and classification of enzymes, and importance of enzyme 
study, differences between catalysts and biocatalysts, nomenclature and properties of enzymes; including 
regulation of enzyme activity, ribozymes, exo-and endo-enzymes; Lipids: Definition, classification and 
understand the biological functions of lipids and fats, classification of fatty acids based on structures and 
nutritional aspects, nomenclature and structure of various essential and non-essential fatty acids, structure and 
function of cholesterol and other complex lipids; Nucleic acid: Definition and classification of nucleotides 
and nucleic acids, properties and structural features of DNA and RNA, chargaff’s rule, Watson and Crick 
model of DNA, differentiate between nucleosides and nucleotides, and DNA and RNA, occurrence of nucleic 
acids in different species and cellular compartments. 
 
Practical: 
Demonstration on lab-safety rules, and use of pH meter and analytical balance; Preparation of different 
solutions and their standardization; Qualitative analysis of carbohydrates and proteins; Estimation of water-
soluble vitamin (L-ascorbic acid); Estimation of glucose content by Fehling’s method; Estimation of acid 
value of oil; Detection of sugars and proteins in animal blood and urine; Estimation of acetic acid content in 
the supplied vinegar solution; Extraction of DNA and RNA from a given sample and qualitative test for nucleic 
acids. 
 
 
 
 
BMB 161: Metabolism of Biomolecules: Course Credit: 3+0 (T+P) 
Theory 
Basics of metabolism: Definition of metabolisms and to differentiate between different classes of metabolism 
in biological system, list of major metabolic pathways involved in living cells, intermediary metabolism and 
metabolic regulations; Carbohydrate metabolism: Different pathways and fates of carbohydrate 
metabolism, carbohydrate biosynthesis by taking examples of glucose, sucrose, starch, glycogen and cellulose, 
carbohydrate catabolism in terms of glycolysis, glycogenolysis, and starch mobilization, differences between 
aerobic and anaerobic glycolysis, and their importance in living cells, alternative fate of glucose metabolisms 
in terms of pentose phosphate pathway, importance of pentose phosphate pathway in biological reactions, 
gluconeogenesis and its hormonal regulation , cori-cycle and its importance in health, glyoxalate cycle and its 
importance, tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and its regulation, biosynthetic roles of TCA cycle intermediates, 
and anaplerotic reactions, electron transport chain (ETC), and its different complexes involved in ETC, 
chemiosmotic hypothesis and oxidative phosphorylation for ATP production in ETC, contribution of ETC to 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and antioxidant mechanism for ROS detoxification; Amino acid 
and protein metabolism: Protein turnover, and amino acid biosynthesis and regulation, pathways that convert 
amino acids to specialized products, amino acid catabolism by transamination and oxidative degradation, 
metabolic fate of carbon skeletons derived from amino acid catabolism, biosynthesis and importance of ketone 
bodies, importance of urea cycle for nitrogen metabolism, the linkage between Urea cycle and TCA cycle, 
how hormones regulate protein biosynthesis; Lipid and fat metabolism: Cell membrane structure made up 
of different types of lipids, fat mobilization and production of fatty acids, biosynthesis of saturated and 
unsaturated fatty acids, how fatty acids are catabolized by different types of oxidation reactions and their 
regulations, biosynthesis of (phyto) cholesterol and its roles in vitamin-D synthesis, synthesis and degradation 
of phospholipids and glycolipids; Nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolism: Biosynthesis of purine and 
pyrimidines using salvage and de-novo pathways, formation of deoxy-nucleotides, pathways involved in the 
synthesis of nucleotide co-enzymes, e.g. NAD (P), Coenzyme A, FAD etc., degradation of nucleotides and 
associated metabolic disorders, synthesis of DNA from DNA (replication), RNA from DNA (transcription) 
and protein from RNA (translation); Intermediary metabolism and bioenergetics: Concept of bioenergetics, 
free energy, enthalpy, entropy, and standard free energy change, ATP’s role as universal energy career and 
ATP-ADP cycle. 
 
 
Department of Computer Science and Information Technology (CST) 
 
CST 131: Computer Application: Course Credit: 0+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory 
Introduction to computer-Compare the computer with calculator, Definition of computer, Classification of 
computer; Information Needed. The focus of ICT in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry is to meet the 
modern advances in research and extension technologies, Collection of Agro veterinary Data and Information; 
Information Retrieval System: Store and retrieval of information, Search engines, User friendly interface, 
Different types of information system such as Decision Support Systems (DSS), Customer Relationship 
Management (CRM), Accounting Information Systems (AIS), Human Resource Management Systems 
(HRMS); Data representation: Data, Information, Presentation in the form of reports, graphs, images, tables, 
etc.   System, Data Tabulation, Data Processing, Data Manipulation; Real-time monitoring and prediction: 
Online health and biosciences, locally stored veterinary and medical imaging, Computer-assisted learning 
packages and simulation. Multi-user virtual environments, Web's growth and advances in wireless and mobile 
communications linked to biosensor tags or radio-frequency identification technologies; Web Technologies: 
Web search processes- World Wide Web-Cloud computing (Drop box, Google drive), Online data surveying 
using cloud services, Web tool for animal experiments, Experimental Design Assistant (EDA), Design and 
reporting animal studies-, Visual representation of animal experiment; ICT in Analytical techniques: Aquatic 
Animal Health-Small Animal Clinical Sciences-Large Animal Clinical Sciences; Constraints and challenges 
of veterinary e-learning development. 
 
Practical:  
Practical Based Lab Work Plan; Application software (word and excel) for assignment and tutorial; Graphical 
representation of veterinary medicine data; Web search and database processing for animal science; 
Application software (MS power point) for Scientific presentations. 
 
 
 
Department of Statistics (SST) 
 
STT 331: Biostatistics: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory:  
Over viewing different introductory terms/concepts of statistics and apply in animal sciences; Discuss 
different tabular and graphical presentations (such as frequency table, histogram, boxplot, scatter plot etc.); 
Learning summary statistics of measures of central tendency; Learning to compare and interpret the structure 
of the datasets; Discuss different probability distributions and their properties; Learning to draw inference on 
the basis of sample from hypothesis test about the phenomena; Discuss how to apply correlation and regression 
analysis for animal sciences; Finally, learn about basic observational studies and their application on animal 
sciences. 
 
Practical 
Application of data presentation (tabular and graphical) in the field of animal sciences; Application and 
interpretation of the calculated results in the field of animal sciences; Application and interpretation of the 
calculated results in the field of animal sciences; probability distribution functions for fisheries data analysis; 
Draw inference on the basis of sample from hypothesis test about the animal sciences problem; Application 
of correlation and regression analysis; Analysis of data with association measurements and interpretation of 
the results.  
 
Department of Agribusiness (AGB) 
 
AGB 501: Livestock and Poultry Marketing and Agri-business: Course Credit: 3+0 (T+P) 
Theory: 
Understanding livestock and poultry marketing: To discuss the goal and significance of livestock and 
poultry marketing in Bangladesh, distinguish between marketing of agricultural and manufacturing goods; 
Core concepts of marketing: To define core concepts of marketing: customer needs, wants, demands, value 
and satisfaction, exchange and relationship; Market and market structure: To explain the meaning of 
market and its characteristics, describe the components and dimensions of a market, classify markets on 
different basis; identify and distinguish different types of markets based on competition; Market 
functionaries/agencies: To identify different stakeholders/participants (producer, consumer, middlemen, 
traders, government) prevailing in the market; assess the role of different stakeholders in marketing; 
Marketing functions: To discuss the advantages and disadvantages of different marketing functions: 
packaging, transportation, storing, grading and standardization; processing, buying and selling; market 
information, speculation and hedging; Marketing Channels: To define the meaning of marketing channel, 
identify the factors affecting the length of marketing channel, draw the marketing channel of different 
livestock and poultry products; Supply chain and value chain analysis: To elaborate and distinguish between 
the concepts of supply chain and value chain in livestock and poultry marketing; Producer’s surplus of 
agricultural commodities: To know the difference between the types of producer’s surplus: marketed and 
marketable surplus, point out the factors affecting the producers surplus; Market integration, efficiency, 
cost, margin and price spread: To explain different types of market integration, estimate marketing cost, 
margin, efficiency using different methods, discuss the reasons of incurring higher marketing cost and the 
ways to minimize it; Agribusiness and the related topics: To define agribusiness and associated terms, know 
the importance of studying agribusiness in the context of Bangladesh, describe the nature of a successful 
agribusiness, identify the potentials and challenges of agribusiness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Agricultural  and Rural development (AER) 
 
AER 461: Veterinary Extension Education: Course Credit: 3+1 (T+P) 
 
Theory 
Agricultural Extension: Concept, meaning and principles of agricultural extension; Importance of veterinary 
extension and livestock situation in Bangladesh; Education: Education and its type; objectives of education; 
learning and its types; theories and laws of learning; criteria for effective learning; elements and teaching 
process; Extension Organization and Leadership: Meaning and features of an extension organization; 
meaning, types and forms of leadership; qualities of a good leader; Roles of professional and local leaders on 
veterinary extension work; Motivation and Learning: Concept and meaning of motivation; Maslow’s need 
theory; learning process and laws of learning with their implications in veterinary extension education; 
Extension Teaching Methods: Classification of extension methods, essential elements, requirements and use 
of extension teaching methods, advantages and limitations of using different extension teaching methods with 
reference to Bangladesh condition; Communication in Extension: Meaning and importance of 
communication; key elements in the communication process; factors affecting communication in livestock 
extension work; Diffusion and Adoption of Innovation: Concept of diffusion, adoption and innovation; 
elements in the diffusion process; paradigm of innovation decision process; innovativeness and adopter 
categories; Program planning and Evaluation in Extension: Concept, importance, principles and steps of 
extension program planning for livestock development; meaning, purpose, principles and steps of monitoring 
and evaluation of projects related to veterinary extension work; Rural women and rural youth : Rural Youth, 
Definition, Characteristics of Rural Youth, Basic needs of Rural Youth, Possibilities of Rural Youth and 
women in Involving Agriculture and other Nation building Activities. 
 
Practical 
An orientation to different organizations related to agricultural development; Preparation of teaching aids: 
scientific poster; Preparation of lesson plan; Lecture and its practice; Preparation of plan of work and calendar 
of work for a livestock extension program; Preparation of training program; Using PRA technique in 
Extension; Preparation of interview schedule for collection of data about rural and livestock situation; 
Extension field trip to rural areas/Upazila Headquarters to observe rural development activities in the field 
situation with special emphasis on livestock. 
 
 
General Education Unit (GEU) 
 
GEU 131: History of the Rise of Bangladesh: Course Credit: 2+0 (T+P) 
Theory 
Description of the country and its people, Communal politics: Emergence and development of two-nation 
theory, state structure of Pakistan and disparity, Strive for democratic politics and language movement, Efforts 
to establish a democratic government, Military rule: The regime of Ayub kha, Rise of nationalism and the 
movement for self-determination, Six point movement, The mass upsurge of 1969 and the eleven point 
movement, Election of 1970 and declaration of independence by Bangabandhu, The war of Liberation 1971, 
Bengali culture and civilization. 
 
 
GEU 101: Communicative English: Course Credit: 2+0 (T+P) 
 
Theory 
Basic Grammar and Sentence Skills: Verbs and tenses; subject verb agreement; phrases and clauses; various 
sentence construction problems (run-ons, comma slices, fragments, parallelism errors etc.); punctuation marks 
etc; Listening Skills: Comprehensive and constructive listening; critical and critical constructive listening; 
empathetic listening; Reading Skills: Skimming and scanning; predicting, inferring, analyzing and 
interpreting variety of texts; speed reading; Writing Skills: Prewriting techniques, cohesion and linking ideas 
together; descriptive, narrative and argumentative writing styles; writing paragraphs using topic sentence; 
writing essays using thesis statement; writing abstract and summary; writing research papers and proposals; 
writing applications and letters; Speaking and Presentation Skills: Techniques of avoiding stage fear, 
impromptu speaking, memorized presentation, manuscript-reading and extemporaneous presentation, seminar 
presentation; methodological step toward proper public speaking; informative and persuasive speeches of 
special occasions; general interview and job interview techniques. 
 
GEU 301: Career Planning and Development: Course Credit: 2+0 (T+P) 
 
Career Planning 
Introduction to Career Planning; Knowing About Myself; Knowing About My Options; Career  Planning; 
Thinking About My Career Decisions; Social Conditions Affecting Career Development; Working in the New 
Global Economy; Organizational Culture andamp; Effective Work; Alternative Ways to Work; Career and 
Family Roles; Implementing a Strategic Career Plan; Written Communications in Job Hunting; Using the 
Internet in a Job Campaign; Interpersonal Communications in Job Hunting; Negotiating and Evaluating; Job 
Offers; The First Job and Early Career Moves. 
 
Career Development 
Introduction; Interrelationships among lifestyle, work place, and career planning are explored. 
Careerdevelopment theories; occupational educational, and personal/social information sources and delivery 
systems; and organization of career development programs are studied. Accessing the World of Work: 
Developing resumes; Writing cover letters; Seeking job vacancies; And Successful interviewing. 
Understanding and Assisting Clients and Students: Understanding theories of career development and career 
choice; Applying theories of career development and career choice; Career considerations for diverse 
populations; Selecting and implementing career interventions and Role of assessment and appraisal in career 
interventions. 
Job Scope or market 
Department of Livestock Services (DLS); BLRI; Bangladesh Army; Private sectors; International 
Organization (FAO; OIE; WHO, Etc.); Department of Forest., etc. 
